To identify tyrosine kinases which play roles in mammalian early development, the 3\' rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) was performed on mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. Among eight tyrosine kinases thus identified, we report here a novel tyrosine kinase, hyk (adhesion structures linked tyrosine kinase). The sequences of the 4.7 kb cDNA indicated the presence of RGD motif and three epidermal growth factor-like domains put between two immunoglobulin-like domains and three fibronectin type III domains in its extracellular region. It is strongly expressed in ES cells and later stages of embryos, but at low levels in midgestation embryos. It is also expressed at a low level in neural precursor cells from 10-day embryos, but at high levels in embryonic day 15 and neonatal brains. In adult tissues it is expressed ubiquitously.Heparin is required for the binding of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) to high-affinity receptors on cells deficient in cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan. So that this heparin requirement could be evaluated in the absence of other cell surface molecules, we designed a simple assay based on a genetically engineered soluble form of murine FGF receptor 1 (mFR1) tagged with placental alkaline phosphatase. Using this assay, we showed that FGF-receptor binding has an absolute requirement for heparin. By using a cytokine-dependent lymphoid cell line engineered to express mFR1, we also showed that FGF-induced mitogenic activity is heparin dependent. Furthermore, we tested a series of small heparin oligosaccharides of defined lengths for their abilities to support bFGF-receptor binding and biologic activity. We found that a heparin oligosaccharide with as few as eight sugar residues is sufficient to support these activities. We also demonstrated that heparin facilitates FGF dimerization, a property that may be important for receptor activation.A synthetic oligonucleotide was used to isolate mouse brain cDNA clones coding for a brain isoform of the alpha 1 subunit of the voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channel. Twenty-six independent cDNA clones were isolated and sequenced. All the cDNA clones reported here showed high homology to the rat brain class C cDNA sequence (Snutch, T. P., Tomlinson, W. J., Leonard, J. P., and Gilbert, M. M. (1991) Neuron 7, 45-57). Comparison of the individual mouse brain class C (mbC) cDNA sequences indicated the presence of four regions within the alpha 1 subunit coding sequence where alternative splicing can take place in mouse brain and raise the possibility that combinatorial arrangement of these splice variants could give rise to a heterogenous class of mbC transcripts. Northern blot analysis demonstrated that mbC mRNA sequences could be detected in highest abundance in mouse heart, at lower levels in mouse brain and spinal cord, and not at all in liver or skeletal muscle. An expression vector for one isoform of the mbC alpha 1 subunit cDNA was constructed using the human cytomegalovirus promoter to direct expression, and this expression vector was used in a novel transfection assay of primary cultures of bovine adrenal chromaffin cells. Transfection of the mbC alpha 1 subunit expression vector increased the secretion of human growth hormone derived from a cotransfected human growth hormone expression vector after stimulation with elevated K+ or the dihydropyridine agonist, Bay K8644. These experiments suggest that this isoform of the mbC alpha 1 subunit is functional in the transfected chromaffin cells and that the number of Ca2+ channels is a limiting component in the secretion from chromaffin cells in culture.A search for protein tyrosine kinases expressed during murine cardiogenesis resulted in the isolation of a novel tyrosine kinase, designated tek, which maps to mouse chromosome 4 between the brown and pmv-23 loci. The deduced amino acid sequence of tek predicts that it encodes a putative receptor tyrosine kinase that contains a 21 amino acid kinase insert and which is most closely related in its catalytic domains to FGFR1 and the product of the ret proto-oncogene. In situ hybridization analysis of adult tissues, as well as sectioned and whole-mount embryos, showed that tek is specifically expressed in the endocardium, the leptomeninges and the endothelial lining of the vasculature from the earliest stages of their development. Moreover, examination of the morphology of tek-expressing cells, and staging of tek expression relative to that of the endothelial cell marker von Willebrand factor, revealed that tek is expressed prior to von Willebrand factor and appears to mark the embryonic progenitors of mature endothelial cells. tek encodes a novel putative receptor tyrosine kinase that may be critically involved in the determination and/or maintenance of cells of the endothelial lineage.The embryonic neuroepithelium gives rise to the components of the central nervous system in the mature animal. To study the early development of the murine central nervous system we have sought to isolate growth factor receptors from the neuroepithelium of the neural tube of 10-day-old mouse embryos. Because many growth factor receptors are members of the protein-tyrosine kinase family, we have used the polymerase chain reaction to amplify mRNA sequences from 10-day-old mouse embryo neuroepithelium; these sequences lie between the nucleotide sequences of two highly conserved amino acid motifs from the catalytic domain of protein-tyrosine kinases. By using this technique we have isolated a clone encoding the murine basic fibroblast growth factor receptor (bFGF-R), as well as a shorter form of this mRNA. This latter cDNA comprised 75% of the bFGF-R cDNA clones isolated from the immortalized neuroepithelial cell lines. This variant mRNA, designated here as N-bFGF-R, appears to be expressed at higher levels in neuronal cells in early stages of development. The bFGF-R is a member of a multigene family, as demonstrated by Southern blot analysis and the cloning of two other members of this family.Expression cDNA library of fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-responsive mouse breast cancer cells (SC-3) was prepared and screened using chick FGF receptor (FGF-R) cDNA as a probe. Two positive clones were isolated. Sequence analysis revealed that two clones have an identical full open reading frame. Compared with sequence data on mouse brain FGF-R, SC-3 cells were found to contain FGF-R with 12 amino acids insertion near N-terminal region. This insertion was mainly composed of hydrophobic amino acids. Additionally, the deletion of two amino acids in extracellular domain and the substitution of one amino acid in C-terminal region were identified in SC-3 cell FGF-R. Transfection of this clone into CHO cells resulted in a significant increase in basic FGF (bFGF) binding.Adaptins are the major components of adaptors, the protein complexes that link clathrin to transmembrane proteins (e.g., receptors) in coated pits and vesicles. The plasma membrane adaptor contains an alpha-adaptin subunit and a beta-adaptin subunit, while the Golgi adaptor contains a gamma-adaptin subunit and a beta\'-adaptin subunit. A partial cDNA clone encoding gamma-adaptin was isolated from a bovine brain expression library by screening with antibodies, and was used to obtain a cDNA clone from a mouse brain library containing the full coding sequence. The identity of the clones was confirmed by protein sequencing. The deduced amino acid sequence of gamma-adaptin was found to be homologous to that of alpha-adaptin, with several stretches of identical amino acids or conservative substitutions in the first approximately 70 kD, and 25% identity overall. Weaker homology was seen between gamma- and beta-adaptins. Like both alpha- and beta-adaptins, gamma-adaptin has a proline and glycine-rich hinge region, dividing it into NH2- and COOH-terminal domains. A chimeric gamma-adaptin was constructed from the mouse and bovine cDNAs and transfected into Rat 1 fibroblasts. Immunofluorescence microscopy was carried out using an mAb which recognizes an epitope present on the chimera but not found on the rodent protein. The construct was found to have a distribution typical of endogenous gamma-adaptin. Using this transfection system, it should now be possible to exchange domains between alpha- and gamma-adaptins, to try to find out how adaptors are targeted to the appropriate membrane compartment of the cell, and how they recruit the appropriate receptors into the coated vesicle.The human flg gene has been previously shown to encode a tyrosine kinase whose transcription in endothelial cells is regulated by the fibroblast growth factor (FGF). We report the cloning and sequencing of the murine flg which revealed that the full length transcript encodes a transmembrane receptor-like protein. The extracellular portion is composed of three homologous immunoglobulin-like domains, resembling the organization of the receptor for interleukin-1, and the cytoplasmic domain displays unique organization of tyrosine kinase sequences. An anti-peptide antibody directed to the carboxy-terminus of the flg protein recognized three fibroblast-cell proteins (p150, p130 and p105), that undergo phosphorylation in the immune-complex. Moreover, the antibody specifically immunoprecipitated two proteins (p145 and p120) that were covalently crosslinked to basic FGF, but only one (p155) of the two molecular forms of the receptor for acidic FGF. In situ hybridization analysis of mouse embryos (12.5 days p.c.) indicated that flg is transcribed in the prospective brain, areas of the face and the vertebral column. The latter exhibited progressive cranio-caudal concentration into the intervertebral discs. Taken together, these results strongly suggest that the flg gene encodes a receptor for fibroblast growth factor(s).We have cloned a murine cDNA encoding a tyrosine kinase receptor with about 90% similarity to the chicken fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor and the human fms-like gene (FLG) tyrosine kinase. This mouse receptor lacks 88 amino acids in the extracellular portion, leaving only two immunoglobulin-like domains compared to three in the chicken FGF receptor. The cDNA was cloned into an expression vector and transfected into receptor-negative CHO cells. We show that cells expressing the receptor can bind both basic FGF and Kaposi FGF. Although the receptor binds basic FGF with a 15- to 20-fold higher affinity, Kaposi FGF is able to induce down-regulation of the receptor to the same extent as basic FGF. The receptor is phosphorylated upon stimulation with both FGFs, DNA synthesis is stimulated, and a proliferative response is produced in cells expressing the receptor, whereas cells expressing the cDNA in the antisense orientation show none of these responses to basic FGF or Kaposi FGF. Thus this receptor can functionally interact with two growth factors of the FGF family.The diversity of L-type calcium channels was probed using the polymerase chain reaction and primers based on regions conserved in the L-type skeletal muscle (CaCh 1) and cardiac calcium channels (CaCh 2). Related sequences were amplified from human heart, hamster heart, rabbit heart, mouse ovary, mouse BC3H1 cells, and hamster insulin-secreting (HIT) cells. Sequencing of various clones revealed the presence of alternate splicing in gene products coding for CaCh 1, CaCh 2, and a related calcium channel. This related gene product, which we refer to as neuroendocrine or CaCh 3, is expressed in brain and endocrine cells. The diverse products can be explained by the use of alternate exons of equal size, which account for changes in amino acid composition, in combination with an alternate splice acceptor site or an exon skipping event, which produces channels of variable length. Four variants were defined for the gene 3 product, subtypes 3a, 3b, 3c, and 3d that differed in both the sequence of the third membrane spanning segment of the fourth repeat unit (IVS3) and in the size of the linker between this and the fourth membrane spanning segment (IVS4). Three CaCh 2 variants were cloned, subtypes 2a, 2c, and 2d, that are homologous to the a, c, and d variants of CaCh 3. For the skeletal muscle calcium channel only two variants were isolated. They are homologous to those of the a and c subtypes of CaCh 2 or 3, in that they differ only in the size of the IVS3 to IVS4 linker. These results demonstrate that calcium channel diversity is created by both the expression of distinct genes and the alternate splicing of these genes.Degenerate oligodeoxyribonucleotide (oligo) primers derived from amino acid (aa) sequence motifs held in common between all members of the protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) family were used to prime the amplification of PTK-related sequences from a variety of murine cDNA sources, including the haemopoietic cell lines, FDC-P1 and WEHI-3B D+, peritoneal macrophages and whole brain. Several parameters, such as the length (short, i.e., less than 20 nucleotides (nt) vs. long, i.e., greater than 30 nt) and degeneracy (i.e., moderately degenerate vs. highly degenerate) of the oligo primers and the temperature of the extension phase of the reaction, were examined. The data from these analyses suggest that the most effective type of primer in this application of the polymerase chain reaction is a short, moderately degenerate oligo such as that which might be derived from the small patches of aa sequence homology that are frequently found to be held in common among members of protein families. In addition to a number of previously described PTK sequences, a novel mammalian PTK-related sequence was uncovered.The DNA sequence of cDNA clones prepared from transcripts of the mouse met proto-oncogene reveals that the mouse met gene encodes a 1380 amino acid protein with the characteristics of a growth factor receptor. This protein can be divided into several putative domains, including an intracellular protein tyrosine kinase domain, a transmembrane domain and a 929 amino acid extracellular domain, possessing a potential proteolytic cleavage site with the sequence Lys-Arg-Arg-Lys-Arg-Ser. To gain additional insights into the function of the met protein we have examined the level of met transcripts in tissues of the late-gestation mouse conceptus. Transcription of met was observed in most of the tissues analysed, but the highest levels of met mRNA were detected in the yolk sac, amnion and kidney; no transcripts were detectable in the calvaria. Chromosomal localization using a series of mouse-hamster hybrid cell lines has demonstrated that met is located on mouse chromosome 6.The murine immune interferon (IFN-gamma) gene was cloned and expressed under control of the simian virus 40 early promoter in the monkey COS-1 cell line. A protein is secreted from these cells having the biological, antigenic, and biochemical characteristics of natural murine IFN-gamma. Cloned murine IFN-gamma cDNAs were obtained by using RNA from both mitogen-induced murine spleens and the transfected COS cells, and both code for identical proteins. The mature murine IFN-gamma encoded is 136 amino acids long, 10 amino acids shorter than human IFN-gamma. The nucleotide homology between the murine and human IFN-gamma genes is 60-65%, whereas the encoded proteins are only 40% homologous. Murine IFN-gamma cDNA was expressed in Escherichia coli under trp promoter control.Mouse P19 embryonal carcinoma cells can be reproducibly differentiated into neurons and glial cells upon treatment with high concentrations of retinoic acid (RA). To understand the molecular mechanisms that control early neural differentiation, we constructed P19 cell lines carrying an insertion of a gene-trap vector containing lacZ as the reporter gene and a G418 resistance gene. We tested expression of the lacZ gene during the RA-induced differentiation process of 300 clones selected with G418. Ten of these clones were stained with X-gal, and five of these ten clones showed up- or down-regulation of lacZ expression. We analyzed one clone, GT1, in which expression of the lacZ gene was markedly up-regulated. The 5\'-flanking genomic DNA of the GT1 gene present at the site of integration was isolated by the plasmid rescue method, and we screened a cDNA library using this DNA gene as a probe. The GT1 cDNA is about 9000 bp long, with an open reading frame encoding 1840 amino acids. This amino acid sequence has a potential glycosaminoglycan attachment site (Ser-Gly-Gly-Gly) and three N-linked glycosylation sites, but no signal peptide. The sequence of GT1 does not show significant homology with any other known proteins, suggesting that GT1 may be a novel proteoglycan core protein. In situ hybridization revealed that GT1 mRNA was expressed ubiquitiously in the adult mouse brain. This expression was specifically localized in neurons but not in glial cells. Immunohistochemistry revealed that GT1 protein was also localized in neurons. These results suggest that this protein may play a fundamental role in neurons.Various in vitro studies have suggested that ErbB4 (HER4) is a receptor for the neuregulins, a family of closely related proteins implicated as regulators of neural and muscle development, and of the differentiation and oncogenic transformation of mammary epithelia. Here we demonstrate that ErbB4 is an essential in vivo regulator of both cardiac muscle differentiation and axon guidance in the central nervous system (CNS). Mice lacking ErbB4 die during mid-embryogenesis from the aborted development of myocardial trabeculae in the heart ventricle. They also display striking alterations in innervation of the hindbrain in the CNS that are consistent with the restricted expression of the ErbB4 gene in rhombomeres 3 and 5. Similarities in the cardiac phenotype of ErbB4 and neuregulin gene mutants suggest that ErbB4 functions as a neuregulin receptor in the heart; however, differences in the hindbrain phenotypes of these mutants are consistent with the action of a new ErbB4 ligand in the CNS.Developing motor axons induce synaptic specializations in muscle fibers, including preferential transcription of acetylcholine receptor (AChR) subunit genes by subsynaptic nuclei. One candidate nerve-derived signaling molecule is AChR-inducing activity (ARIA)/heregulin, a ligand of the erbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases. Here, we asked whether ARIA and erbB kinases are expressed in patterns compatible with their proposed signaling roles. In developing muscle, ARIA was present not only at synaptic sites, but also in extrasynaptic regions of the muscle fiber. ARIA was synthesized, rather than merely taken up, by muscle cells, as indicated by the presence of ARIA mRNA in muscle and of ARIA protein in a clonal muscle cell line. ARIA-responsive myotubes expressed both erbB2 and erbB3, but little EGFR/erbB1 or erbB4. In adults, erbB2 and erbB3 were localized to the postsynaptic membrane. ErbB3 was restricted to the postsynaptic membrane perinatally, at a time when ARIA was still broadly distributed. Thus, our data are consistent with a model in which ARIA interacts with erbB kinases on the muscle cell surface to provide a local signal that induces synaptic expression of AChR genes. However, much of the ARIA is produced by muscle, not nerve, and the spatially restricted response may result from the localization of erbB kinases as well as of ARIA. Finally, we show that erbB3 is not concentrated at synaptic sites in mutant mice that lack rapsyn, a cytoskeletal protein required for AChR clustering, suggesting that pathways for synaptic AChR expression and clustering interact.Tie-1 and Tie-2 define a new class of receptor tyrosine kinases that are specifically expressed in developing vascular endothelial cells. To study the functions of Tie-1 and Tie-2 during vascular endothelial cell growth and differentiation in vivo, targeted mutations of the genes in mice were introduced by homologous recombination. Embryos deficient in Tie-1 failed to establish structural integrity of vascular endothelial cells, resulting in oedema and subsequently localized haemorrhage. However, analyses of embryos deficient in Tie-2 showed that it is important in angiogenesis, particularly for vascular network formation in endothelial cells. This result contrasts with previous reports on Tie-2 function in vasculogenesis and/or endothelial cell survival. Our in vivo analyses indicate that the structurally related receptor tyrosine kinases Tie-1 and Tie-2 have important but distinct roles in the formation of blood vessels.Two new mouse genes encoding proteins that belong to the yeast minichromosome maintenance (MCM) protein family, which is involved in the initiation of DNA replication, were isolated and their nucleotide sequence was determined. They were a putative CDC46/MCM5 homolog and a putative cdc21 homolog. About 30% amino acid identity was obtained between members in the family, and > 40% between the putative mouse and yeast homologs. The expression of these genes was cell-cycle specific at the late G1 to S phase. Immunochemical analyses showed the physical interaction between mouse P1MCM3 and CDC46 protein. These results suggest that MCM proteins function in co-ordination for DNA replication.Limb muscles develop from cells that migrate from the somites. The signal that induces migration of myogenic precursor cells to the limb emanates from the mesenchyme of the limb bud. Here we report that the c-met-encoded receptor tyrosine kinase is essential for migration of myogenic precursor cells into the limb anlage and for migration into diaphragm and tip of tongue. In c-met homozygous mutant (-/-) mouse embryos, the limb bud and diaphragm are not colonized by myogenic precursor cells and, as a consequence, skeletal muscles of the limb and diaphragm do not form. In contrast, development of the axial skeletal muscles proceeds in the absence of c-met signalling. The specific ligand of the c-met protein, the motility and growth factor scatter factor/hepatocyte growth factor, is expressed in limb mesenchyme and can thus provide the signal for migration which is received by c-met. We have therefore identified a paracrine signalling system that regulates migration of myogenic precursor cells.A cDNA encoding a mouse transcription factor IID (TFIID) subunit, containing histone H4 homology, was cloned and sequenced. The predicted 678-amino-acid (aa) sequence of this molecule showed 97 and 41% identity to the human and Drosophila melanogaster homologues, respectively. Four putative direct repeats were found in the most highly conserved region in the central part of this protein.CHD1 is a novel DNA-binding protein that contains both a chromatin organization modifier (chromo) domain and a helicase/ATPase domain. We show here that CHD1 preferentially binds to relatively long A.T tracts in double-stranded DNA via minor-groove interactions. Several CHD1-binding sites were found in a well-characterized nuclear-matrix attachment region, which is located adjacent to the intronic enhancer of the kappa immunoglobulin gene. The DNA-binding activity of CHD1 was localized to a 229-amino-acid segment in the C-terminal portion of the protein, which contains sequence motifs that have previously been implicated in the minor-groove binding of other proteins. We also demonstrate that CHD1 is a constituent of bulk chromatin and that it can be extracted from nuclei with 0.6 M NaCl or with 2 mM EDTA after mild digestion with micrococcal nuclease. In contrast to another chromo-domain protein, HP1, CHD1 is not preferentially located in condensed centromeric heterochromatin, even though centromeric DNA is highly enriched in (A+T)-rich tracts. Most interestingly, CHD1 is released into the cytoplasm when cells enter mitosis and is reincorporated into chromatin during telophase-cytokinesis. These observations lend credence to the idea that CHD1, like other proteins with chromo or helicase/ATPase domains, plays an important role in the determination of chromatin architecture.Miller-Dieker lissencephaly syndrome (MDS) is a human developmental brain malformation caused by neuronal migration defects resulting in abnormal layering of the cerebral cortex. LIS1, the gene defective in MDS, encodes a subunit of brain platelet-activating factor (PAF) acetylhydrolase which inactivates PAF, a neuroregulatory molecule. We have isolated murine cDNAs homologous to human LIS1 and mapped these to three different chromosomal loci (Lis1, Lis3, Lis4). The predicted sequences of murine Lis1 protein and its human homolog LIS1 are virtually identical. In the developing mouse and human, Lis1 and LIS1 genes were strongly expressed in the cortical plate. In the adult mouse Lis1 transcripts were abundant in cortex and hippocampus. The direct correlation between cortical defects in MDS patients and Lis1 expression in the murine cortex suggest that the mouse is a model system suitable to study the mechanistic basis of this intriguing genetic disease.The arrangement of exons and introns encoding 5\'-side of murine fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor 1 (FGFR-1) gene was mapped. A large intron with a size of 14 kb was identified between exon 1 and exon 2. In addition, all FGFR-1 subtypes including a unique variant form with 12 amino acids insertion and two amino acids deletion were observed to be able to be generated through alternative splicing. Furthermore, complete sequencing of the 5\'-region of FGFR-1 mRNA revealed that a relatively large open reading frame precedes the major open reading frame encoding FGFR-1. These results indicate that FGFR-1 mRNAs are uniquely translated from an internal translation start site.Calcium entry, via a dihydropyridine-sensitive pathway, is required for differentiation in murine erythroleukemia cells (MELC). Calcium channel currents have been identified physiologically in some non-excitable cells, but little is known regarding the structure of these channels. We show that a truncated form of the alpha 1 subunit of the cardiac voltage-gated calcium channel (dihydropyridine receptor, DHPR) is expressed in MELC. This MELC calcium channel lacks the first four transmembrane segments of the DHPR (IS1 to IS4). A MELC calcium channel/cardiac DHPR chimera, co-expressed with the alpha 2 and beta subunits of the DHPR, forms a functional calcium channel in Xenopus oocytes.The nucleotide (nt) sequence of the LIS-1 cDNA encoding the murine lissencephaly-1 (LIS-1) protein has been determined. The deduced protein shows a very high degree (99.8%) of homology with human LIS-1, having a single conservative amino acid (aa) change out of 410 aa and is identical to a subunit of bovine platelet-activating factor (PAF) acetylhydrolase.Basic (b) fibroblast growth factor (FGF) mediates various biological responses including mitogenesis and angiogenesis by binding to specific cell surface receptors of the tyrosine kinase family. The bFGF receptor-1 FGFR1) exists in short and long isoforms due to alternate RNA splicing. Minor alterations in the amino acid sequence have also led to reports of different FGFR1 isoforms in different tissues even in the same species. In the absence of any sequence for heart FGFR1 and accumulating evidence for a role of bFGF in heart growth and differentiation, we cloned FGFR1 from embryonic mouse hearts. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to generate full-length short (2259 base pairs) and long (2526 base pairs) forms of FGFR1 cDNAs which generated 86 and 102 kDa proteins, respectively, following in vitro translation. Embryonic mouse heart FGFR1 differed by seven amino acids from the reported sequence for mouse neuroepithelial FGFR1 and appeared more similar to human placental FGFR1. A single FGFR1 transcript of approximately 4.3 kb was seen in RNA isolated from embryonic as well as adult mouse hearts. There was a decrease (approximately 8.5-fold) in FGFR1 RNA levels in the adult. The majority of FGFR1 transcripts in the adult as well as embryonic heart contained exon IIIc (FGFR1-IIIc) which is associated with isoforms that display the highest affinity for bFGF. However, the relative ratio of short versus long FGFR1 RNA expression was 0.5 in the embryonic heart compared to 5.9 in the adult heart. These results indicate that: (i) structurally distinct short and long FGFR1 isoform RNAs are expressed in the embryonic and adult heart; (ii) FGFR1-IIIc is the major form of receptor expressed in the embryonic as well as adult heart; (iii) the transition from the embryo to the adult stage is associated with a decrease but not absence of FGFR1 RNA expression; and (iv) long FGFR1-isoforms are more abundant in the embryo while short FGFR1 isoforms predominate in the adult.The receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) expressed on the surface of endothelial cells are likely to play key roles in initiating the program of endothelial cell growth during development and subsequent vascularization during wound healing and tumorigenesis. Expression of the Tek RTK during mouse development is restricted primarily to endothelial cells and their progenitors, the angioblasts, suggesting that Tek is a key participant in vasculogenesis. To investigate the role that Tek plays within the endothelial cell lineage, we have disrupted the Tek signaling pathway using two different genetic approaches. First, we constructed transgenic mice expressing a dominant-negative form of the Tek receptor. Second, we created a null allele of the tek gene by homologous recombination in embryonic stem (ES) cells. Transgenic mice expressing dominant-negative alleles of Tek or homozygous for a null allele of the tek locus both died in utero with similar defects in the integrity of their endothelium. By crossing transgenic mice that express the lacZ reporter gene under the transcriptional control of the endothelial cell-specific tek promoter, we found that the extraembryonic and embryonic vasculature was patterned correctly. However, homozygous tek embryos had approximately 30% and 75% fewer endothelial cells at day 8.5 and 9.0, respectively. Homozygous null embryos also displayed abnormalities in heart development, consistent with the conclusion that Tek is necessary for endocardial/myocardial interactions during development. On the basis of the analysis of mice carrying either dominant-negative or null mutations of the tek gene, these observations demonstrate that the Tek signaling pathway plays a critical role in the differentiation, proliferation, and survival of endothelial cells in the mouse embryo.We report the isolation of a cDNA encoding the mouse class A bHLH transcription factor ME2 and the analysis of its expression. ME2 is expressed in the cerebral cortex, Purkinje and granule cell layers of the cerebellum, olfactory neuroepithelium, pyramidal cells of hippocampal layers CA1-CA4, and in the granular cells of the dentate gyrus. The specific expression of ME2 during development and in the regions of neuronal plasticity in the adult brain suggest that ME2 may have a regulatory function in developmental processes as well as during neuronal plasticity.Experiments in amphibians have implicated fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) in the generation and patterning of mesoderm during embryogenesis. We have mutated the gene for fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (fgfr-1) in the mouse to genetically dissect the role of FGF signaling during development. In the absence of fgfr-1 signaling, embryos displayed early growth defects; however, they remained capable of gastrulating and generating mesoderm. The nascent mesoderm of fgfr-1 homozygous mutant embryos differentiated into diverse mesodermal subtypes, but mesodermal patterning was aberrant. Somites were never generated and axial mesoderm was greatly expanded at the expense of paraxial mesoderm. These results suggest that FGFR-1 transduces signals that specify mesodermal cell fates and regional patterning of the mesoderm during gastrulation.We have explored the role of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR-1) in early embryonic development using three experimental systems: genetically deficient mice, in vitro blastocyst culture, and FGFR-1-deficient embryonic stem cells. Using these systems, we demonstrate that FGFR-1 is required for proper embryonic cell proliferation and for the correct axial organization of early postimplantation embryos but not for mesoderm formation. FGFR-1-deficient embryos display severe growth retardation both in vitro and in vivo and die prior to or during gastrulation. Although these mutants can form nonaxial tissues, such as the allantois, amnion, and yolk sac mesoderm, they display defective patterning of the primitive streak and other axial structures, and frequently exhibit truncations or disorganization of posterior embryonic regions. Such abnormalities are unlikely to be caused by intrinsic blocks in mesodermal differentiation, as FGFR-1-deficient ES cell lines form teratomas consisting of many mesodermal cell types.We are interested in the molecular mechanisms that are involved in the development of the vascular system. In order to respond to morphogenetic and mitogenic signals, endothelial cells must express appropriate receptors. To characterize endothelial cell-specific receptors, we have concentrated on receptor tyrosine kinases, because several lines of evidence suggested the importance of controlled phosphotyrosine levels in endothelial cells. A strategy based on PCR amplification using degenerate oligonucleotides and mouse brain capillaries as mRNA source, led to the identification of a novel receptor tyrosine kinase, which we designated tie-2. In situ hybridization using a tie-2-specific probe revealed an interesting spatial and temporal expression pattern. The gene was expressed specifically in the endothelial lineage. tie-2 transcripts were present in endothelial cell precursors (angioblasts) and also in endothelial cells of sprouting blood vessels throughout development and in all organs and tissues so far examined. tie-2 was down-regulated in the adult. Because of the unusual combination of immunoglobulin, EGF-like and fibronectin type III domains in the extracellular portion of tie-2 which is shared by TEK and tie, these molecules may be considered members of a new family of receptor tyrosine kinases. Signal transduction via this new class of tyrosine kinases could lead to a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of blood vessel formation.The cDNA of a novel mouse cell surface receptor (tie2) has been isolated from a mouse lung library. The predicted amino acid sequence of tie2 encodes a protein of 1122 amino acids, with an extracellular domain and an intracellular tyrosine kinase domain bisected by a transmembrane region. The extracellular domain consists of two Ig-like domains, three cysteine-rich domains and three fibronectin type III repeats whilst the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain has a short insert region of 15 amino acids. In vitro transcription/translation of the tie2 cDNA demonstrates that it encodes a glycoprotein of some 145 kDa. The tie2 protein exhibits a high degree of similarity to the cell surface receptor tie, (Partanen, J. et al., (1992) Mol. Cell. Biol., 12, 1698-1707), and together with this protein defines a new class of cell surface receptor.A series of translocation break points found in a subset of human acute leukemias have one of the breaks on human chromosome 11q23. This region has recently been cloned and a large gene, ALL-1, with homology to the Drosophila trithorax gene has been identified. This paper describes the cloning, sequencing, and mapping of the mouse homolog of ALL-1. We have found a motif present in All-1 that shows homology to the zinc-binding domain of DNA (cytosine-5) methyltransferases (EC 2.1.1.63). Sequence analysis of the murine All-1 gene has identified distinct regions of homology with the human ALL-1 gene; these highly conserved domains may define regions of functional significance in mammals. In addition, we have identified alternatively spliced forms of All-1 within one of the zinc-finger domains, suggesting that there may be different targets and/or functions for All-1 proteins. Finally, we report that All-1 resides in the proximal portion of mouse chromosome 9 and is a candidate for a mutation that results in skeletal transformations during embryonic development.Depending on the target cells and culture conditions, scatter factor/hepatocyte growth factor (SF/HGF) mediates several distinct activities, i.e., cell motility, proliferation, invasiveness, tubular morphogenesis, angiogenesis, or cytotoxicity. A small isoform of SF/HGF encoded by a natural splice variant, which consists of the NH2-terminal hairpin structure and the first two kringle domains but not the protease homology region, induces cell motility but not mitogenesis. Two types of SF/HGF receptors have recently been discovered in epithelial cells, the high affinity c-Met receptor tyrosine kinase, and low affinity/high capacity binding sites, which are probably located on heparan sulfate proteoglycans. In the present study, we have addressed the question whether the various biological activities of SF/HGF are transduced into cells by a single type of receptor. We have here examined MDCK epithelial cells transfected with a hybrid cDNA encoding the ligand binding domain of the nerve growth factor (NGF) receptor and the membrane-spanning and tyrosine kinase domains of the Met receptor. We demonstrate that all biological effects of SF/HGF upon epithelial cells such as the induction of cell motility, proliferation, invasiveness, and tubular morphogenesis can now be triggered by the addition of NGF. Thus, it is likely that all known biological signals of SF/HGF are transduced through the receptor tyrosine kinase encoded by the c-Met protooncogene.We have cloned a 4.2-kb murine cDNA encoding the Tek receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), which is expressed in endothelial cells and their progenitors. The 1122-residue protein contains an extracellular domain comprising three fibronectin type III repeats fused to two immunoglobulin-like loops that are in turn separated by three epidermal growth factor-like repeats. The association of these different structural motifs and their characteristic arrangement in the Tek extracellular domain has been reported for only one other RTK, Tie, an endothelial-specific RTK of human origin. We show here that Tek and Tie are encoded by distinct genes and that, together, these receptors define a new subfamily of RTKs. In addition, we demonstrate that the tek cDNA, when introduced into COS cells, encodes a product of 140 kDa and that this protein and/or tek transcripts are detectable in highly vascularized embryonic tissues and in some, but not all, cell lines of endothelial origin.To identify receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) critical to early hematopoiesis, we performed polymerase chain reaction-based cloning from yolk sac and highly enriched bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Characterization of two novel genes of their full-length cDNA sequences revealed that they were mouse homologues of the endothelial cell RTK genes, TIE and TEK. They shared a unique structural property of coexistent immunoglobulin-like domain, epidermal growth factor-like repeats, and fibronectin type III repeats in their extracellular domains. Both genes were expressed in a similar fashion in adult tissues and primitive hematopoietic cells, predominantly in the bone marrow HSCs.We report the molecular cloning and characterization of two structurally related putative receptor tyrosine kinases, encoded by distinct genes (tie-1 and tie-2) on mouse chromosome 4. Both tie-1 and tie-2 encode receptor proteins possessing unique multiple extracellular domains: two immunoglobulin-like loop domains flanking three epidermal growth factor repeats followed by three fibronectin-type III repeats. Both genes are expressed in early embryonic vascular system and in maternal decidual vascular endothelial cells, where the vasculature undergoes an active angiogenesis. tie-2, but not tie-1, expression was also detected in extraembryonic mesoderm of the amnion. tie-1, but not tie-2, is expressed in an acute myelogenic cell line in vitro. tie-1 and tie-2 may form another class within the receptor tyrosine kinase gene family, and further characterization of these genes and identification of their putative ligands should define the nature of the signal-transduction cascades underlying early vascular system development, as well as their differential roles in mesodermal cells of the amniotic and myeloid lineages.Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) exerts pleiotropic effects, including antiviral activity, stimulation of macrophages and natural killer cells, and increased expression of major histocompatibility complex antigens. Mice without the IFN-gamma receptor had no overt anomalies, and their immune system appeared to develop normally. However, mutant mice had a defective natural resistance, they had increased susceptibility to infection by Listeria monocytogenes and vaccinia virus despite normal cytotoxic and T helper cell responses. Immunoglobulin isotype analysis revealed that IFN-gamma is necessary for a normal antigen-specific immunoglobulin G2a response. These mutant mice offer the possibility for the further elucidation of IFN-gamma-mediated functions by transgenic cell- or tissue-specific reconstitution of a functional receptor.Two overlapping cDNAs that encode a 197-kDa sequence-selective DNA-binding protein were isolated from libraries derived from mouse lymphoid cell mRNA. In addition to a DNA-binding domain, the protein contains both a chromodomain, which occurs in proteins that are implicated in chromatin compaction, and an SNF2/SWI2-like helicase domain, which occurs in proteins that are believed to activate transcription by counteracting the repressive effects of chromatin structure. A Southern blot analysis indicated that this protein, which we have named CHD-1, for chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein, is present in most, if not all, mammalian species. A Northern blot analysis revealed multiple CHD mRNA components that differed both qualitatively and quantitatively among various cell types. The various mRNAs, which are probably produced by alternative RNA processing, could conceivably encode tissue-specific and developmental stage-specific isoforms of the protein. Based on its interesting combination of features, we suspect that CHD-1 plays an important role in gene regulation.The DNA polymerase alpha-primase complex purified from mouse FM3A cells is composed of four polypeptides with molecular masses of 180, 68, 54, and 46 kDa. The largest subunit has DNA polymerase activity, the two smallest subunits have DNA primase activity, and the function of the 68-kDa subunit is unknown. We have isolated the cDNAs of the four subunits by low stringency hybridization and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and determined their nucleotide sequences. The predicted amino acid sequence of the 180-kDa subunit shows 88, 38, 34, and 32% identity to those of the catalytic subunits of human, Drosophila melanogaster, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae DNA polymerase alpha, respectively, and contains seven regions whose orders and sequences are highly conserved among viral and other eukaryotic DNA polymerases. The deduced amino acid sequence of the 68-kDa subunit shows 25% identity to that of the 73-kDa subunit of D. melanogaster DNA polymerase alpha-primase, shows no significant sequence similarity to any other protein in the data bases, but contains a potential phosphorylation site(s) for cdc2 kinase. The amino acid sequence of the 54-kDa subunit shows 32% identity to that of the large subunit of S. cerevisiae DNA primase. During activation of quiescent Swiss mouse 3T3 cells to proliferate, the levels of mRNA of the four subunits of the DNA polymerase alpha-primase complex increased before DNA synthesis. In growing mouse FM3A cells, the transcripts of the four subunits are present throughout the cell cycle and increase slightly prior to the S phase.MEF-2 is a muscle-specific DNA binding activity that recognizes an A+T-rich sequence found in the control regions of numerous muscle-specific genes. The recent cloning of MEF-2 showed that it belongs to the MADS (MCM1, Agamous, Deficiens, and serum-response factor) box family of transcription factors and that MEF-2 mRNA is expressed ubiquitously. Here we describe the cloning of a member of the MEF-2 gene family, referred to as MEF-2C, that is nearly identical to other MEF-2 gene products in the MADS box but diverges from other members of the family outside of this domain. MEF-2C binds the MEF-2 site with high affinity and can activate transcription of a reporter gene linked to tandem copies of that site. In contrast to previously described members of the MEF-2 family, MEF-2C transcripts are highly enriched in skeletal muscle, spleen, and brain of adult mice and are upregulated during myoblast differentiation. These results suggest that the MEF-2 site is a target for a diverse family of proteins that regulates transcription in a variety of cell types.Adenylosuccinate lyase catalyzes two similar reactions in the de novo purine biosynthetic pathway; the cleavage of succinylaminoimidazole carboxamide ribotide to aminoimidazole carboxamide ribotide and fumarate and the cleavage of adenylosuccinate to adenylate and fumarate. Adenylosuccinate lyase is also a participant in the purine nucleotide cycle which plays an important role in maintaining the AMP levels in muscle. In order to understand the structure/function and evolutionary relationships of the members of the fumarate gene family and to evaluate the possible existence of tissue specific isoforms of adenylosuccinate lyase, we have isolated and characterized the murine cDNA and gene encoding adenylosuccinate lyase. The cDNA has 94% and 87% identity to the human sequence at the amino acid and nucleotide levels respectively. The gene is about 27 kb and contains 13 exons. Comparison of the exon/intron structure of this gene with the argininosuccinate lyase gene did not suggest gene duplication or exon shuffling as a mechanism of evolution in the fumarate gene family.Proteins of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family are transcription factors that bind DNA containing the E box motif (CANNTG) found in the promoters of many muscle-specific genes. ITF-2 is a bHLH protein with widespread expression that is thought to form active heterodimers with MyoD, a muscle-specific bHLH transcription factor. We have isolated cDNAs derived from two alternatively spliced forms of mouse ITF-2, termed MITF-2A and -2B. These proteins differ in their N termini. Neither MITF-2A nor -2B transactivated the cardiac alpha-actin promoter, which contains an E box, when transfected into nonmuscle cells. In fact, MITF-2B inhibited MyoD activation of the cardiac alpha-actin promoter. This inhibitory activity required the N-terminal 83 amino acids since MITF-2A showed no inhibitory activity, and a mutant MITF-2B with deletion of the N-terminal 83 amino acids failed to inhibit MyoD-mediated transcriptional activation. MyoD activity was also inhibited by Id, a HLH protein, and this inhibition was reversed by the addition of excess E12 or MITF-2A. However, the inhibition of MyoD activity by MITF-2B was not reversed with E12 or MITF-2A. While Id is thought to inhibit MyoD by binding and sequestering potential dimerization partners, MITF-2B appears to inhibit MyoD activity by forming an inactive heterodimer with MyoD. Thus, differentially spliced transcripts of mouse ITF-2 encode different proteins that appear to dimerize with MyoD and activate or repress transcription.The yeast two-hybrid system was used to isolate a clone from a 17-day-old mouse embryo cDNA library that codes for a novel 812-aa long protein fragment, glucocorticoid receptor-interacting protein 1 (GRIP1), that can interact with the hormone binding domain (HBD) of the glucocorticoid receptor. In the yeast two-hybrid system and in vitro, GRIP1 interacted with the HBDs of the glucocorticoid, estrogen, and androgen receptors in a hormone-regulated manner. When fused to the DNA binding domain of a heterologous protein, the GRIP1 fragment activated a reporter gene containing a suitable enhancer site in yeast cells and in mammalian cells, indicating that GRIP1 contains a transcriptional activation domain. Overexpression of the GRIP1 fragment in mammalian cells interfered with hormone-regulated expression of mouse mammary tumor virus-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene and constitutive expression of cytomegalovirus-beta-galactosidase reporter gene, but not constitutive expression from a tRNA gene promoter. This selective squelching activity suggests that GRIM can interact with an essential component of the RNA polymerase II transcription machinery. Finally, while a steroid receptor HBD fused with a GAL4 DNA binding domain did not, by itself, activate transcription of a reporter gene in yeast, coexpression of this fusion protein with GRIP1 strongly activated the reporter gene. Thus, in yeast, GRIP1 can serve as a coactivator, potentiating the transactivation functions in steroid receptor HBDs, possibly by acting as a bridge between HBDs of the receptors and the basal transcription machinery.Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are essential molecules for mammalian development. The nine known FGF ligands and the four signaling FGF receptors (and their alternatively spliced variants) are expressed in specific spatial and temporal patterns. The activity of this signaling pathway is regulated by ligand binding specificity, heparan sulfate proteoglycans, and the differential signaling capacity of individual FGF receptors. To determine potentially relevant ligand-receptor pairs we have engineered mitogenically responsive cell lines expressing the major splice variants of all the known FGF receptors. We have assayed the mitogenic activity of the nine known FGF ligands on these cell lines. These studies demonstrate that FGF 1 is the only FGF that can activate all FGF receptor splice variants. Using FGF 1 as an internal standard we have determined the relative activity of all the other members of the FGF family. These data should serve as a biochemical foundation for determining developmental, physiological, and pathophysiological processes that involve FGF signaling pathways.Members of the myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) family of transcription factors activate muscle gene expression by binding an A/T-rich DNA sequence in the control regions of muscle-specific genes. There are four MEF2 factors in vertebrates, MEF2A-D, which share homology in an amino-terminal MADS domain and an adjacent region known as the MEF2 domain, that together mediate DNA binding and dimerization. We show that serine 59 located between the MADS and MEF2 domains of MEF2C is phosphorylated in vivo and can be phosphorylated in vitro by casein kinase-II (CKII). Phosphorylation of this site enhanced the DNA binding and transcriptional activity of MEF2C by increasing its DNA binding activity 5-fold. In vivo 32P labeling experiments showed that serine 59 is the only phosphorylation site in the MADS and MEF2 domains. Mutagenesis of this serine to an aspartic acid resulted in an increase in DNA binding and transcriptional activity of MEF2C comparable to that observed when this site was phosphorylated, suggesting that phosphorylation augments DNA binding activity by introducing negative charge. This phosphorylation site, which corresponds to a CKII recognition site, is conserved in all known MEF2 factors in organisms ranging from flies to humans, consistent with its importance for the functions of MEF2C.Tuberous sclerosis (TS) is a genetically heterogeneous disease characterized by the widespread appearance of nonmalignant growths that affect multiple organ systems. A TS disease-determining gene, located at 16p13.3 and designated TSC2, has recently been cloned. In this report, the murine TSC2 homologue was cloned and characterized. cDNA clones encompassing the entire murine TSC2 transcript were isolated. Sequence analysis revealed a high degree of homology between the deduced amino acid sequence of the murine and human gene products. Northern blot surveys demonstrated widespread TSC2 expression which was subject to developmental regulation in a tissue-specific manner. Although high levels of TSC2 transcripts were observed in many adult tissues, protein analyses are required to determine whether functional tuberin protein is synthesized. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analyses identified at least six regions of alternative splicing, several of which modified putative regulatory motifs in the deduced amino acid structure of the TSC2 protein.The semaphorins are a family of proteins thought to be involved in axonal guidance. Most of the known semaphorins have a similar primary structure characterized by the semaphorin domain and a carboxy-terminal Ig motif. Here we report the cloning of two members (semF and G) of a novel class of membrane-bound semaphorins which contain seven carboxy-terminal thrombospondin repeats, a motif known to promote neurite outgrowth. SemF and G transcripts are expressed, together with semD and E, in specific regions of young mouse embryos, demarcating distinct compartments of the developing somites or the undifferentiated neuroepithelium. The identification of semF and G increases the number of vertebrate semaphorins to at least 20 and suggests that some semaphorins might act as positive axonal guidance cues.The presence of an extra copy of human chromosome 21 (trisomy 21), especially region 21q22.2, causes many phenotypes in Down syndrome, including mental retardation. To study genes potentially responsible for some of these phenotypes, we cloned a human candidate gene (DYRK) from 21q22.2 and its murine counterpart (Dyrk) that are homologous to the Drosophila minibrain (mnb) gene required for neurogenesis and to the rat Dyrk gene (dual specificity tyrosine phosphorylation regulated kinase). The three mammalian genes are highly conserved, >99% identical at the protein level over their 763-amino-acid (aa) open reading frame; in addition, the mammalian genes are 83% identical over 414 aa to the smaller 542-aa mnb protein. The predicted human DYRK and murine Dyrk proteins both contain a nuclear targeting signal sequence, a protein kinase domain, a putative leucine zipper motif, and a highly conserved 13-consecutive-histidine repeat. Fluorescence in situ hybridization and regional mapping data localize DYRK between markers D21S336 and D21S337 in the 21q22.2 region. Northern blot analysis indicated that both human and murine genes encode approximately 6-kb transcripts. PCR screening of cDNA libraries derived from various human and murine tissues indicated that DYRK and Dyrk are expressed both during development and in the adult. In situ hybridization of Dyrk to mouse embryos (13, 15, and 17 days postcoitus) indicates a differential spatial and temporal pattern of expression, with the most abundant signal localized in brain gray matter, spinal cord, and retina. The observed expression pattern is coincident with many of the clinical findings in trisomy 21. Its chromosomal locus (21q22. 2), its homology to the mnb gene, and the in situ hybridization expression patterns of the murine Dyrk combined with the fact that transgenic mice for a YAC to which DYRK maps are mentally deficient suggest that DYRK may be involved in the abnormal neurogenesis found in Down syndrome.The effects of somatostatin hormones are mediated by a family of five different seven-helix transmembrane spanning receptors (SSTR1-5). The expression of the five different SSTR subtypes displays a complex temporal- and tissue-specific pattern. To investigate the molecular mechanisms controlling the different expression patterns of the SSTRs, we cloned the 5\'-flanking region of the human SSTR2 gene. Characterization of the SSTR2 promoter resulted in the identification of a novel initiator element (SSTR2inr). Transcriptional activity of the SSTR2inr is dependent on the presence of a binding site (E-box) for basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. By screening a mouse brain cDNA expression library we isolated a cDNA coding for the bHLH transcription factor SEF-2. SEF-2 binds to the E-box present in the SSTR2inr, both in vitro and in vivo and activates transcription from the SSTR2inr. A single point mutation within the E-box eliminates binding of SEF-2 and results in a complete loss of transcriptional activity of the SSTR2inr. Furthermore, DNA binding studies demonstrate that the basal transcription factor TFIIB can be tethered to the SSTR2inr through physical interaction with SEF-2. In summary, the SSTR2inr represents a novel type of initiator element that confers gene expression in the absence of a TATA-box or binding sites for other known initiator factors, like YY-1 or USF.The myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) proteins are transcription factors required for muscle differentiation. In the present study we examined MEF2 expression in developing cerebellar granule neurons. In the developing postnatal cerebellum, RNA blot analysis revealed that MEF2A and MEF2D RNA levels increase after birth. The majority of this increase occurs around postnatal day 9 reaching a peak at postnatal day 15-18 which is maintained in adults. This time course of expression coincides with the expression of GABA(A) receptor alpha6 subunit RNA, a marker for the differentiation of the mature cerebellar granule neurons. We further observed, using the polyclonal antibody generated against an MEF2A peptide, that MEF2 protein expression occurs primarily in the internal granule cell layer of the developing cerebellum. Thus, MEF2 expression increases as granule neurons differentiate and mature. Experiments also indicated that MEF2 expression not only occurs in the cerebellum but also in other regions of the CNS. In adult mice, expression of RNA for the MEF2 isoforms A, C and D occurs throughout the CNS. MEF2A and D expression occurs at highest levels in the olfactory bulb, hippocampus and cerebellum. The expression of MEF2C differs with low levels of expression in the cerebellum and hindbrain. Using the MEF2A polyclonal antibody, we observed a similar adult pattern of expression for the MEF2 protein with high level of expression in the olfactory bulb, cortex, hippocampus, thalamus and cerebellum. These observations suggest that MEF2 molecules may be an important factor involved in CNS neuron differentiation similar to their role in muscle differentiation.We mapped the murine copy of the Dyrk gene and examined its subcellular localization and self-interaction. We found that: (1) Dyrk maps to the distal portion of MMU chromosome 16, consistent with previous mapping of the human DYRK gene to the Down syndrome critical region on HSA 21q22.2. (2) The Dyrk protein localizes to the cell nucleus, affording the potential of controlling the expression of other gene(s). (3) The Dyrk protein can self-associate in a two-hybrid system, in accord with the presence of a leucine zipper motif noted in the original sequence. In particular, its expression pattern in frontal brain nuclei during murine embryogenesis, its subcellular localization and its ability to interact with other proteins all suggest that this protein remains a good candidate to mediate some of the pleiotropic effects of Down syndrome.Deletions involving regions of chromosome 10 occur in the vast majority (> 90%) of human glioblastoma multiformes. A region at chromosome 10q23-24 was implicated to contain a tumour suppressor gene and the identification of homozygous deletions in four glioma cell lines further refined the location. We have identified a gene, designated MMAC1, that spans these deletions and encodes a widely expressed 5.5-kb mRNA. The predicted MMAC1 protein contains sequence motifs with significant homology to the catalytic domain of protein phosphatases and to the cytoskeletal proteins, tensin and auxilin. MMAC1 coding-region mutations were observed in a number of glioma, prostate, kidney and breast carcinoma cell lines or tumour specimens. Our results identify a strong candidate tumour suppressor gene at chromosome 10q23.3, whose loss of function appears to be associated with the oncogenesis of multiple human cancers.After binding to enhancer elements, transcription factors require transcriptional coactivator proteins to mediate their stimulation of transcription initiation. A search for possible coactivators for steroid hormone receptors resulted in identification of glucocorticoid receptor interacting protein 1 (GRIP1). The complete coding sequence for GRIP1, isolated from a mouse brain cDNA library, contains an open reading frame of 1,462 codons. GRIP1 is the probable ortholog of the subsequently identified human protein transcription intermediary factor 2 (TIF2) and is also partially homologous to steroid receptor coactivator 1 (SRC-1). The full-length GRIP1 interacted with the hormone binding domains (HBDs) of all five steroid receptors in a hormone-dependent manner and also with HBDs of class II nuclear receptors, including thyroid receptor alpha, vitamin D receptor, retinoic acid receptor alpha, and retinoid X receptor alpha. In contrast to agonists, glucocorticoid antagonists did not promote interaction between the glucocorticoid receptor and GRIP1. In yeast cells, GRIP1 dramatically enhanced the transcriptional activation function of proteins containing the HBDs of any of the above-named receptors fused to the GAL4 DNA binding domain and thus served as a transcriptional coactivator for them. This finding contrasts with previous reports of TIF2 and SRC-1, which in mammalian cells enhanced the transactivation activities of only a subset of the steroid and nuclear receptors that they physically interacted with. GRIP1 also enhanced the hormone-dependent transactivation activity of intact glucocorticoid receptor, estrogen receptor, and mineralocorticoid receptor. Experiments with glucocorticoid receptor truncation and point mutants indicated that GRIP1 interacted with and enhanced the activity of the C-terminal AF-2 but not the N-terminal AF-1 transactivation domain of the glucocorticoid receptor. These results demonstrate directly that AF-1 and AF-2 domains accomplish their transactivation activities through different mechanisms: AF-2 requires GRIP1 as a coactivator, but AF-1 does not.Members of the myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) family of MADS (MCM1, agamous, deficiens, serum response factor)-box transcription factors bind an A-T-rich DNA sequence associated with muscle-specific genes. The murine MEF2C gene is expressed in heart precursor cells before formation of the linear heart tube. In mice homozygous for a null mutation of MEF2C, the heart tube did not undergo looping morphogenesis, the future right ventricle did not form, and a subset of cardiac muscle genes was not expressed. The absence of the right ventricular region of the mutant heart correlated with down-regulation of the dHAND gene, which encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor required for cardiac morphogenesis. Thus, MEF2C is an essential regulator of cardiac myogenesis and right ventricular development.The functionally conserved proteins CBP and p300 act in conjunction with other factors to activate transcription of DNA. A new factor, p/CIP, has been discovered that is present in the cell as a complex with CBP and is required for transcriptional activity of nuclear receptors and other CBP/p300-dependent transcription factors. The highly related nuclear-receptor co-activator protein NCoA-1 is also specifically required for ligand-dependent activation of genes by nuclear receptors. p/CIP, NCoA-1 and CBP all contain related leucine-rich charged helical interaction motifs that are required for receptor-specific mechanisms of gene activation, and allow the selective inhibition of distinct signal-transduction pathways.Friedreich\'s ataxia is due to loss of function mutations in the gene encoding frataxin (FRDA). Frataxin is a protein of unknown function. In situ hybridization analyses revealed that mouse frataxin expression correlates well with the main site of neurodegeneration, but the expression pattern is broader than expected from the pathology of the disease. Frataxin mRNA is predominantly expressed in tissues with a high metabolic rate, including liver, kidney, brown fat and heart. We found that mouse and yeast frataxin homologues contain a potential mitochondrial targeting sequence in their N-terminal domains and that disruption of the yeast gene results in mitochondrial dysfunction. Finally, tagging experiments demonstrate that human frataxin co-localizes with a mitochondrial protein. Friedreich\'s ataxia is therefore a mitochondrial disease caused by a mutation in the nuclear genome.Human epidermal growth factor receptor 4 (HER4) is a member of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor subfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases that is activated by neuregulins (NRG), betacellulin (BTC), and heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor. Sequencing of full-length human HER4 cDNAs revealed the existence of two HER4 isoforms that differed by insertion of either 23 or 13 alternative amino acids in the extracellular juxtamembrane (JM) region. The 23-amino acid form (HER4 JM-a) and the 13-amino acid form (HER4 JM-b) were expressed in a tissue-specific manner, as demonstrated by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of mouse and human tissues. Both isoforms were expressed in neural tissues such as cerebellum, whereas kidney expressed HER4 JM-a only and heart HER4 JM-b only. In situ hybridization using specific oligonucleotides demonstrated transcription of both JM-a and JM-b isoforms in the mouse cerebellum. Tyrosine phosphorylation analysis indicated that both receptor isoforms were activated to the same extent by NRG-beta1 and BTC, and to a lesser extent by NRG-alpha1 and heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor. A functional difference was found, however, in response to phorbol ester treatment. Stimulation of cells with phorbol ester resulted in a loss of 125I-NRG-beta1 binding and in a reduction of total cell-associated HER4 protein in HER4 JM-a transfectants but not in HER4 JM-b transfectants. It was concluded that novel alternatively spliced isoforms of HER4 exist, that they are distributed differentially in vivo in mouse and human tissues, that they are both activated by HER4 ligands, and that they may represent cleavable and noncleavable forms of HER4.Platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolases (PAF-AHs) play an important role in the metabolism of PAF, a potent phospholipid mediator affecting various physiological processes. The heterotrimeric form of intracellular PAF-AH consists of two catalytic subunits (PAF-AH Ib beta and PAF-AH Ib gamma) and a potential regulatory subunit (PAF-AH Ib alpha). Hemizygous deletion of the gene encoding the alpha subunit has been implicated in two related neurological disorders: isolated lissencephaly sequence and Miller-Dieker syndrome. Here we report the isolation and characterization of mouse Pafaha/Lis1 cDNAs and the corresponding Pafaha/Lis1 gene. We have cloned five cDNAs representing alternatively polyadenylated messages. Northern blot analysis revealed that the various Pafaha/Lis1 mRNAs are differentially expressed in mouse tissues. The Pafaha/Lis1 gene spans a genomic region of more than 50 kb and consists of 12 exons, the first 2 of which are embedded in CpG islands. We have identified two sites of alternative splicing of Pafaha/Lis1: one affecting the length of the 5\' untranslated region, the other potentially resulting in a truncated form of the encoded protein.Tcf transcription factors interact with beta-catenin and Armadillo to mediate Wnt/Wingless signaling. We now report the characterization of genes encoding two murine members of the Tcf family, mTcf-3 and mTcf-4. mTcf-3 mRNA is ubiquitously present in embryonic day 6.5 (E6.5) mouse embryos but gradually disappears over the next 3 to 4 days. mTcf-4 expression occurs first at E10.5 and is restricted to di- and mesencephalon and the intestinal epithelium during embryogenesis. The mTcf-3 and mTcf-4 proteins bind a canonical Tcf DNA motif and can complex with the transcriptional coactivator beta-catenin. Overexpression of Wnt-1 in a mammary epithelial cell line leads to the formation of a nuclear complex between beta-catenin and Tcf proteins and to Tcf reporter gene transcription. These data demonstrate a direct link between Wnt stimulation and beta-catenin/Tcf transcriptional activation and imply a role for mTcf-3 and -4 in early Wnt-driven developmental decisions in the mouse embryo.We have cloned and characterized Gtf2i, the mouse homolog of human GTF2I (general transcription factor II-I), which encodes BAP-135, a target for Bruton\'s tyrosine kinase. GTF2I represents the telomeric and functional copy of a duplicated gene flanking the 2-Mb Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) common deletion at 7q11.23. GTF2I is deleted in WBS, while a truncated centromeric pseudogene (GTF2IP1) is not deleted. In mouse, there appears to be only a single locus, Gtf2i, which we mapped to mouse chromosome 5 in a region of conserved mouse-human synteny. Gtf2i is 87.7% identical to GTF2I at the nucleotide and 97% at the amino acid level and generates several alternatively spliced transcripts. The gene is widely expressed in adult tissues and equally in all areas of the brain. Gtf2i transcript is detectable in ES cells by RT-PCR and on Northern blots of tissues from 7-dpc embryos. A ubiquitous expression pattern is seen by Northern and tissue in situ hybridization studies of 14-dpc embryos.Tie2 is an endothelium-specific receptor tyrosine kinase that is required for both normal embryonic vascular development and tumor angiogenesis and is thought to play a role in vascular maintenance. However, the signaling pathways responsible for the function of Tie2 remain unknown. In this report, we demonstrate that the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) associates with Tie2 and that this association confers functional lipid kinase activity. Mutation of tyrosine 1101 of Tie2 abrogated p85 association both in vitro and in vivo in yeast. Tie2 was found to activate PI3-kinase in vivo as demonstrated by direct measurement of increases in cellular phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate and phosphatidylinositol 3, 4-bisphosphate, by plasma membrane translocation of a green fluorescent protein-Akt pleckstrin homology domain fusion protein, and by downstream activation of the Akt kinase. Activation of PI3-kinase was abrogated in these assays by mutation of Y1101 to phenylalanine, consistent with a requirement for this residue for p85 association with Tie2. These results suggest that activation of PI3-kinase and Akt may in part account for Tie2\'s role in both embryonic vascular development and pathologic angiogenesis, and they are consistent with a role for Tie2 in endothelial cell survival.Mutations of the genes encoding APC or beta-catenin in colon carcinoma induce the constitutive formation of nuclear beta-catenin/Tcf-4 complexes, resulting in activated transcription of Tcf target genes. To study the physiological role of Tcf-4 (which is encoded by the Tcf7/2 gene), we disrupted Tcf7/2 by homologous recombination. Tcf7/2-/- mice die shortly after birth. A single histopathological abnormality was observed. An apparently normal transition of intestinal endoderm into epithelium occurred at approximately embryonic day (E) 14.5. However, no proliferative compartments were maintained in the prospective crypt regions between the villi. As a consequence, the neonatal epithelium was composed entirely of differentiated, non-dividing villus cells. We conclude that the genetic program controlled by Tcf-4 maintains the crypt stem cells of the small intestine. The constitutive activity of Tcf-4 in APC-deficient human epithelial cells may contribute to their malignant transformation by maintaining stem-cell characteristics.Endonuclease III (endoIII; nth gene product) of Escherichia coli is known to be a DNA repair enzyme having a relatively broad specificity for damaged pyrimidine bases of DNA. Here, we describe the cloning and characterization of the cDNA and the gene for a mouse homologue (mNthl1/mNth1) of endoIII. The cDNA was cloned from a mouse T-cell cDNA library with a probe prepared by PCR using the library and specific PCR primers synthesized based on the reported information of partial amino acid sequences of bovine NTHL1/NTH1 and of EST Data Bases. The cDNA is 1025 nucleotides long and encodes a protein consisting of 300 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 33.6 kDa. The amino acid sequence exhibits significant homologies to those of endoIII and its prokaryotic and eukaryotic homologues. The recombinant mNthl1 with a hexahistidine tag was overexpressed in a nth::cmr nei::Kmr double mutant of E. coli, and purified to apparent homogeneity. The enzyme showed thymine glycol DNA glycosylase, urea DNA glycosylase and AP lyase activities. Northern blot analysis indicated that mNthl1 mRNA is about 1 kb and is expressed ubiquitously. A 15 kb DNA fragment containing the mNthl1 gene was cloned from a mouse genomic library and sequenced. The gene consists of six exons and five introns spanning 6.09 kb. The sequenced 5\' flanking region lacks a typical TATA box, but contains a CAAT box and putative binding sites for several transcription factors such as Ets, Sp1, AP-1 and AP-2. The mNthl1 gene was shown to lie immediately adjacent to the tuberous sclerosis 2 (Tsc2) gene in a 5\'-to-5\' orientation by sequence analysis and was assigned to chromosome 17A3 by in situ hybridization.The embryonal carcinoma cell line P19 responds to treatment with retinoid acid by differentiation into neuronal cell types [2]. Using radioactively labeled cDNA derived from differentiating P19 cells we screened an adult mouse brain cDNA library and isolated a gene named shyc for selective hybridizing clone. The encoded protein did not reveal homology to any known protein. We used in situ hybridization on mouse embryonic and adult brain sections to study shyc expression. The developing and embryonic nervous system showed the most prominent hybridization signals. In the adult brain the olfactory pathway was marked by shyc expression.Methylation at the DNA sequence 5\'-CpG is required for mouse development. MeCP2 and MBD1 (formerly PCM1) are two known proteins that bind specifically to methylated DNA via a related amino acid motif and that can repress transcription. We describe here three novel human and mouse proteins (MBD2, MBD3, and MBD4) that contain the methyl-CpG binding domain. MBD2 and MBD4 bind specifically to methylated DNA in vitro. Expression of MBD2 and MBD4 tagged with green fluorescent protein in mouse cells shows that both proteins colocalize with foci of heavily methylated satellite DNA. Localization is disrupted in cells that have greatly reduced levels of CpG methylation. MBD3 does not bind methylated DNA in vivo or in vitro. MBD1, MBD2, MBD3, and MBD4 are expressed in somatic tissues, but MBD1 and MBD2 expression is reduced or absent in embryonic stem cells which are known to be deficient in MeCP1 activity. The data demonstrate that MBD2 and MBD4 bind specifically to methyl-CpG in vitro and in vivo and are therefore likely to be mediators of the biological consequences of the methylation signal.The embryonic vasculature develops from endothelial cells that form a primitive vascular plexus which recruits smooth muscle cells to form the arterial and venous systems. The MADS-box transcription factor MEF2C is expressed in developing endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells (SMCs), as well as in surrounding mesenchyme, during embryogenesis. Targeted deletion of the mouse MEF2C gene resulted in severe vascular abnormalities and lethality in homozygous mutants by embryonic day 9.5. Endothelial cells were present and were able to differentiate, but failed to organize normally into a vascular plexus, and smooth muscle cells did not differentiate in MEF2C mutant embryos. These vascular defects resemble those in mice lacking the vascular-specific endothelial cell growth factor VEGF or its receptor Flt-1, both of which are expressed in MEF2C mutant embryos. These results reveal multiple roles for MEF2C in vascular development and suggest that MEF2-dependent target genes mediate endothelial cell organization and SMC differentiation.Interleukin-4 (IL-4) stimulates B cell growth and differentiation, such as inducing mature B cells to switch to IgG1 and IgE production. To further characterize IL-4 effects on B cells, we used a sensitive PCR-based subtraction approach to isolate genes expressed in IL-4 treated cells. Our approach combined an adaptation of the genomic representational difference analysis (RDA) method to cDNA analysis with a physical separation method (magnetic bead depletion). This cDNA RDA technique allowed us to perform subtraction on the relatively small number of highly, characterized, purified B cells that can be conveniently prepared. In the hopes of removing genes responsible for general cell growth, we subtracted cDNA made from lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated B cells from cDNA from LPS+IL-4 stimulated B cells. Two rounds of subtraction resulted in greater than 100-fold enhancement of expected IL-4-induced Cgamma1 cDNA. At that point, we cloned this subtraction library and analysed 154 randomly picked clones for sequence similarities. From these clones, 37 individual genes were obtained. Most of these genes (30) could be functionally identified by sequence similarity. These included genes encoding Cgamma1 (1), cytoskeletal components (4) and products involved in DNA replication (3), metabolism (5), signal transduction (4), transcription (4), translation (6) and transport (3). Only 7 genes had no similarity to known sequences in the GenBank, EMBL or Swiss Prot databases. One unknown gene (designated Fig1 for IL-Four Induced Gene 1) and one gene with homology to the human transcription factor E4BP4 were confirmed by Northern blot analysis to be induced 10-20-fold by IL-4 treatment. This list of expressed genes in LPS + IL-4 treated B cells may shed further insight on the action and mechanism of IL-4 stimulation of cells.Specific patterns of neuronal firing induce changes in synaptic strength that may contribute to learning and memory. If the postsynaptic NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors are blocked, long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) of synaptic transmission and the learning of spatial information are prevented. The NMDA receptor can bind a protein known as postsynaptic density-95 (PSD-95), which may regulate the localization of and/or signalling by the receptor. In mutant mice lacking PSD-95, the frequency function of NMDA-dependent LTP and LTD is shifted to produce strikingly enhanced LTP at different frequencies of synaptic stimulation. In keeping with neural-network models that incorporate bidirectional learning rules, this frequency shift is accompanied by severely impaired spatial learning. Synaptic NMDA-receptor currents, subunit expression, localization and synaptic morphology are all unaffected in the mutant mice. PSD-95 thus appears to be important in coupling the NMDA receptor to pathways that control bidirectional synaptic plasticity and learning.The Wingless (Wg)/Wnt signaling pathway activates High Mobility Group (HMG)-box transcription factors of the T-cell Factor (Tcf)/Lymphoid Enhancer Factor (LEF) subfamily and mediates diverse functions in development, possibly including endoderm and gut differentiation. Determinants of tissue specificity in the response to Wg/Wnt signaling remain unknown. We have identified Tcf-4 as the predominant Tcf/LEF factor in the developing mouse gut. During fetal development, Tcf-4 mRNA expression is restricted to gut epithelium and specific regions of the brain, the thalamus and roof of the midbrain. In adults, expression is widespread, with highest levels observed in the liver, an endodermally derived organ, and persists in the gastrointestinal tract. Murine Tcf-4 has multiple RNA splice variants with consequently significant heterogeneity in sequences 3\' to the HMG box. Microinjection of mRNA or plasmid DNA encoding Tcf-4 into Xenopus embryos results in ectopic expression of molecular markers of endoderm and differentiated gut epithelium in isolated animal cap explants. Taken together, these findings point to a potentially important function for Tcf-4 in development of the vertebrate gastrointestinal tract.Localizing cell surface receptors to specific subcellular positions can be critical for their proper functioning, as most notably demonstrated at neuronal synapses. PDZ proteins apparently play critical roles in such protein localizations. Receptor tyrosine kinases have not been previously shown to interact with PDZ proteins in vertebrates. We report that Eph receptors and their membrane-linked ligands all contain PDZ recognition motifs and can bind and be clustered by PDZ proteins. In addition, we find that Eph receptors and ligands colocalize with PDZ proteins at synapses. Thus, PDZ proteins may play critical roles in localizing vertebrate receptor tyrosine kinases and/or their ligands and may be particularly important for Eph function in guidance or patterning or at the synapse.The vulnerability of neurons and the irreversibility of loss make discoveries of neuroprotective compounds fundamentally important. Here, the complete coding sequence of a novel protein (828 amino acids, pI 5.99), derived from mouse neuroglial cells, is revealed. The sequence contained (1) a neuroprotective peptide, NAPVSIPQ, sharing structural and immunological homologies with the previously reported, activity-dependent neurotrophic factor; (2) a glutaredoxin active site; and (3) a zinc binding domain. Gene expression was enriched in the mouse hippocampus and cerebellum and augmented in the presence of the neuropeptide vasoactive intestinal peptide, in cerebral cortical astrocytes. In mixed neuron-astrocyte cultures, NAPVSIPQ provided neuroprotection at subfemtomolar concentrations against toxicity associated with tetrodotoxin (electrical blockade), the beta-amyloid peptide (the Alzheimer\'s disease neurotoxin), N-methyl-D-aspartate (excitotoxicity), and the human immunodeficiency virus envelope protein. Daily NAPVSIPQ injections to newborn apolipoprotein E-deficient mice accelerated the acquisition of developmental reflexes and prevented short-term memory deficits. Comparative studies suggested that NAPVSIPQ was more efficacious than other neuroprotective peptides in the apolipoprotein E-deficiency model. A potential basis for rational drug design against neurodegeneration is suggested with NAPVSIPQ as a lead compound. The relative enrichment of the novel mRNA transcripts in the brain and the increases found in the presence of vasoactive intestinal peptide, an established neuroprotective substance, imply a role for the cloned protein in neuronal function.CHD1, an Mr approximately 200,000 protein that contains a chromodomain (C), an ATPase/helicase-like domain (H) and a DNA-binding domain (D), was previously shown to be associated with decompacted interphase chromatin in mammalian cells and with transcriptionally active puffs and interbands in Drosophila polytene chromosomes. We now show by transient transfection experiments with genes expressing wild-type and mutant forms of CHD1 that both the C and H domains are essential for its proper association with chromatin. We also present evidence for an in vivo interaction between CHD1 and a novel HMG box-containing protein, SSRP1, which involves an amino-terminal segment of CHD1 that does not include the chromodomain. Immunocytochemical analyses indicated that CHD1 and SSRP1 colocalize in both mammalian nuclei and Drosophila polytene chromosomes.Somatostatin receptor type II expression in the mammalian brain displays a spatially and temporally very restricted pattern. In an investigation of the molecular mechanisms controlling these patterns, we have recently shown that binding of the transcription factor SEF-2 to a novel initiator element in the SSTR-2 promoter is essential for SSTR-2 gene expression. Further characterization of the promoter identified a species-conserved TC-rich enhancer element. By screening a mouse brain cDNA expression library, we cloned a cDNA encoding the transcription factor MIBP1. MIBP1 interacts specifically with both the TC box in the SSTR-2 promoter and with the SEF-2 initiator-binding protein to enhance transcription from the basal SSTR-2 promoter. We then investigated SSTR-2, SEF-2, and MIBP1 mRNA expression patterns in the developing and adult murine brain by Northern blotting and in situ hybridization. While SEF-2 is widely expressed in many neuronal and nonneuronal tissues, MIBP1 expression overlapped precisely with expression of SSTR-2 in the frontal cortex and hippocampus. In summary, our data for the first time define a regulatory role for the transcription factor MIBP1 in mediating spatially and temporally regulated SSTR-2 expression in the brain.To investigate the molecular basis of PTEN-mediated tumor suppression, we introduced a null mutation into the mouse Pten gene by homologous recombination in embryonic stem (ES) cells. Pten-/- ES cells exhibited an increased growth rate and proliferated even in the absence of serum. ES cells lacking PTEN function also displayed advanced entry into S phase. This accelerated G1/S transition was accompanied by down-regulation of p27(KIP1), a major inhibitor for G1 cyclin-dependent kinases. Inactivation of PTEN in ES cells and in embryonic fibroblasts resulted in elevated levels of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5,-trisphosphate, a product of phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase. Consequently, PTEN deficiency led to dosage-dependent increases in phosphorylation and activation of Akt/protein kinase B, a well-characterized target of the phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase signaling pathway. Akt activation increased Bad phosphorylation and promoted Pten-/- cell survival. Our studies suggest that PTEN regulates the phosphatidylinositol 3,4, 5,-trisphosphate and Akt signaling pathway and consequently modulates two critical cellular processes: cell cycle progression and cell survival.Receptor tyrosine kinases regulate cell behavior by activating specific signal transduction cascades. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor tyrosine kinases include ErbB1, ErbB2, ErbB3 and ErbB4. ErbB4 is a tyrosine kinase receptor that binds neuregulins (NRG) and several other EGF family members. Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis identified two isoforms of ErbB4 that differed in their cytoplasmic domain sequences. Specifically, RT-PCR using primers flanking the putative phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase (PI3-K) binding site of ErbB4 generated two specific bands when human and mouse heart and kidney tissues were analysed. Cloning and sequencing of these RT-PCR products revealed that one of the ErbB4 isoforms (ErbB4 CYT-2) lacked a 16 amino acid sequence including a putative PI3-K binding site, that was present in the other isoform (ErbB4 CYT-1). RT-PCR analysis of mouse tissues suggested that the expression of ErbB4 CYT-1 and ErbB4 CYT-2 was tissue-specific. Heart, breast and abdominal aorta expressed predominantly ErbB4 CYT-1 whereas neural tissues and kidney expressed predominantly ErbB4 CYT-2. To ascertain whether the absence of the putative PI3-K binding site in ErbB4 CYT-2 also resulted in the loss of PI3-K activity, NIH3T3 cell lines overexpressing ErbB4 CYT-1 or ErbB4 CYT-2 were produced. NRG-1 bound to and stimulated equivalent tyrosine phosphorylation of both isoforms. However, unlike ErbB4 CYT-1, the ErbB4 CYT-2 isoform was unable to bind the p85 subunit of PI3-K and to stimulate PI3-K activity in these cells. Furthermore, tyrosine phosphorylation of p85 or association of PI3-K activity with phosphotyrosine was not induced in NRG-1 treated cells expressing ErbB4 CYT-2, indicating that this isoform was incapable of activating PI3-K even indirectly. It was concluded that a novel naturally occurring ErbB4 isoform exists with a deletion of the cytoplasmic domain sequence required for the activation of the PI3-K intracellular signal transduction pathway and that this is the only PI3-K binding site in ErbB4.A recently described protein, metaxin 1, serves as a component of a preprotein import complex in the outer membrane of the mammalian mitochondrion. A yeast two-hybrid screen with metaxin 1 as bait has now identified a novel protein, which we have termed metaxin 2, as a metaxin 1-binding protein. Metaxin 2 shares 29% identity with metaxin 1 at the amino acid level, but metaxin 2, unlike metaxin 1, lacks a C-terminal mitochondrial outer membrane signal-anchor domain. Two C. elegans hypothetical proteins, CelZC97.1 and CelF39B2.i, share high sequence similarity with metaxin 2 and metaxin 1, respectively, and likely represent the C. elegans orthologs. Affinity-purified antibodies against metaxin 2 were prepared against the recombinant protein produced in E. coli and were used to analyze the subcellular distribution of metaxin 2. In subcellular fractions of mouse liver, a 29 kD immunoreactive protein, consistent in size with the predicted translation product of metaxin 2 cDNA, was found solely in mitochondria. Alkali extraction of mitochondria indicated that metaxin 2 is peripherally associated with mitochondrial membranes. Metaxin 2 in intact mitochondria was susceptible to digestion with proteinase K, indicating that metaxin 2 is located on the cytosolic face of the mitochondrial outer membrane. Finally, baculoviruses encoding a His6-tagged metaxin 2 and an untagged metaxin 1 lacking its C-terminal transmembrane domain were produced and used separately or in combination to infect Sf21 insect cells. Metaxin 1 bound to a Ni2+-chelate affinity column only in the presence of metaxin 2, indicating that metaxin 1 and metaxin 2 interact when overexpressed in insect cells. These results suggest that metaxin 2 is bound to the cytosolic face of the mitochondrial outer membrane by means of its interaction with membrane-bound metaxin 1, and that this complex may play a role in protein import into mammalian mitochondria.The p160 family of coactivators, SRC-1, GRIP1/TIF2, and p/CIP, mediate transcriptional activation by nuclear hormone receptors. Coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1), a previously unidentified protein that binds to the carboxyl-terminal region of p160 coactivators, enhanced transcriptional activation by nuclear receptors, but only when GRIP1 or SRC-1a was coexpressed. Thus, CARM1 functions as a secondary coactivator through its association with p160 coactivators. CARM1 can methylate histone H3 in vitro, and a mutation in the putative S-adenosylmethionine binding domain of CARM1 substantially reduced both methyltransferase and coactivator activities. Thus, coactivator-mediated methylation of proteins in the transcription machinery may contribute to transcriptional regulation.DNA methylation is essential for murine development and is implicated in the control of gene expression. MeCP2, MBD1, MBD2, MBD3, and MBD4 comprise a family of mammalian, nuclear proteins related by the presence in each of an amino acid motif called the methyl-CpG binding domain (MBD). Each of these proteins, with the exception of MBD3, is capable of binding specifically to methylated DNA. MeCP2, MBD1 and MBD2 can also repress transcription. We describe the genomic structure and chromosomal localization of the human and murine Mbd1, Mbd2, Mbd3, and Mbd4 genes. We find that the highly similar MBD2 and MBD3 proteins are encoded by genes that map to different chromosomes in humans and mice but show a similar genomic structure. The Mbd1 and Mbd2 genes, in contrast, map together to murine and human Chromosomes (Chrs)18. The Mbd3 and Mbd4 genes map to murine Chrs 10 and 6, respectively, while the human MBD3 and MBD4 genes map to Chrs 19 and 3, respectively.Cyclin E is an unstable protein that is degraded in a ubiquitin- and proteasome- dependent pathway. Two factors stimulate cyclin E ubiquitination in vivo: when it is free of its CDK partner, and when it is phosphorylated on threonine 380. We pursued the first of these pathways by using a two-hybrid screen to identify proteins that could bind only to free cyclin E. This resulted in the isolation of human Cul-3, a member of the cullin family of E3 ubiquitin-protein ligases. We found that Cul-3 was bound to cyclin E but not to cyclin E-Cdk2 complexes in mammalian cells, and that overexpression of Cul-3 increased ubiquitination of cyclin E but not other cyclins. Conversely, deletion of the Cul-3 gene in mice caused increased accumulation of cyclin E protein, and had cell-type-specific effects on S-phase regulation. In the extraembryonic ectoderm, in which cells undergo a standard mitotic cycle, there was a greatly increased number of cells in S phase. In the trophectoderm, in which cells go through endocycles, there was a block to entry into S phase. The SCF pathway, which targets cyclins for ubiquitination on the basis of their phosphorylation state, and the Cul-3 pathway, which selects cyclin E for ubiquitination on the basis of its assembly into CDK complexes, may be complementary ways to control cyclin abundance.Signaling by members of the epidermal growth factor receptor family plays an important role in breast development and breast cancer. Earlier work suggested that one of these receptors, ErbB4, is coupled to unique responses in this tissue. To determine the function of ErbB4 signaling in the normal mouse mammary gland, we inactivated ErbB4 signaling by expressing a COOH terminally deleted dominant-negative allele of ErbB4 (ErbB4DeltaIC) as a transgene in the mammary gland. Despite the expression of ErbB4DeltaIC from puberty through later stages of mammary development, an ErbB4DeltaIC-specific phenotype was not observed until mid-lactation. At 12-d postpartum, lobuloalveoli expressing ErbB4DeltaIC protein were condensed and lacked normal lumenal lactation products. In these lobuloalveoli, beta-casein mRNA, detected by in situ hybridization, was normal. However, whey acidic protein mRNA was reduced, and alpha-lactalbumin mRNA was undetectable. Stat5 expression was detected by immunohistochemistry in ErbB4DeltaIC-expressing tissue. However, Stat5 was not phosphorylated at Y694 and was, therefore, probably inactive. When expressed transiently in 293T cells, ErbB4 induced phosphorylation of Stat5. This phosphorylation required an intact Stat5 SH2 domain. In summary, our results demonstrate that ErbB4 signaling is necessary for mammary terminal differentiation and Stat5 activation at mid-lactation.The Tek/Tie2 receptor tyrosine kinase plays a pivotal role in vascular and hematopoietic development. To study the signal transduction pathways that are mediated by this receptor, we have used the yeast two-hybrid system to identify signaling molecules that associate with the phosphorylated Tek receptor. Using this approach, we demonstrate that five molecules, Grb2, Grb7, Grb14, Shp2, and the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase can interact with Tek in a phosphotyrosine-dependent manner through their SH2 domains. Mapping of the binding sites of these molecules on Tek reveals the presence of a multisubstrate docking site in the carboxyl tail of Tek (Tyr(1100)). Mutation of this site abrogates binding of Grb2 and Grb7 to Tek in vivo, and this site is required for tyrosine phosphorylation of Grb7 and p85 in vivo. Furthermore, stimulation of Tek-expressing cells with Angiopoietin-1 results in phosphorylation of both Tek and p85 and in activation of endothelial cell migration and survival pathways that are dependent in part on phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Taken together, these results demonstrate that Angiopoietin-1-induced signaling from the Tek receptor is mediated by a multifunctional docking site that is responsible for activation of both cell migration and cell survival pathways.During development of the vertebrate vascular system essential signals are transduced via protein-tyrosine phosphorylation. Null-mutations of receptor-tyrosine kinase (RTK) genes expressed in endothelial cells (ECs) display early lethal vascular phenotypes. We aimed to identify endothelial protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs), which should have similar importance in EC-biology. A murine receptor-type PTP was identified by a degenerated PCR cloning approach from endothelial cells (VE-PTP). By in situ hybridization this phosphatase was found to be specifically expressed in vascular ECs throughout mouse development. In experiments using GST-fusion proteins, as well as in transient transfections, trapping mutants of VE-PTP co-precipitated with the Angiopoietin receptor Tie-2, but not with the Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor receptor 2 (VEGFR-2/Flk-1). In addition, VE-PTP dephosphorylates Tie-2 but not VEGFR-2. We conclude that VE-PTP is a Tie-2 specific phosphatase expressed in ECs, and VE-PTP phosphatase activity serves to specifically modulate Angiopoietin/Tie-2 function. Based on its potential role as a regulator of blood vessel morphogenesis and maintainance, VE-PTP is a candidate gene for inherited vascular malformations similar to the Tie-2 gene.The murine t complex on chromosome 17 contains a number of homozygous lethal and semi-lethal mutations that disrupt development of the mouse embryo. We recently characterized an embryonic lethality in the rat that results from a germ-line mutation in the tuberous sclerosis 2 (Tsc-2) tumour suppressor gene (the Eker mutation). Remarkably, mouse embryos homozygous for tw8 mutation display cranial defects reminiscent of those observed in rat embryos homozygous for the Eker mutation. To determine whether the Tsc-2 gene, which is in the t complex, is mutated in tw8 or other t haplotypes, we characterized this gene in a series of t haplotype mice. Four Tsc-2 polymorphisms were identified: three in the coding region and one intronic that appeared to be common to all t haplotypes analysed. No evidence was found to argue that the Tsc-2 gene is altered in tw8 haplotype mice. However, in the tw5 haplotype we found a G to T mutation in Tsc-2 that was present only in this t haplotype. In contrast to other polymorphisms within the Tsc-2 coding region which did not result in amino acid changes in Tsc-2 gene product tuberin, this mutation substituted a phenylalanine for a conserved cysteine in tw5 tuberin. Within the t complex, the Tsc-2 gene and the putative tw5 locus appeared to map to different positions, complicating identification of Tsc-2 as a candidate for the tw5 locus and suggesting that the G to T mutation in the Tsc-2 gene may have arisen independently of the tw5 functional mutation.Mouse embryos with a loss-of-function mutation in the gene encoding the receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB4 exhibit misprojections of cranial sensory ganglion afferent axons. Here we analyse ErbB4-deficient mice, and find that morphological differences between wild-type and mutant cranial ganglia correlate with aberrant migration of a subpopulation of hindbrain-derived cranial neural crest cells within the paraxial mesenchyme environment. In transplantation experiments using new grafting techniques in cultured mouse embryos, we determine that this phenotype is non-cell-autonomous: wild-type and mutant neural crest cells both migrate in a pattern consistent with the host environment, deviating from their normal pathway only when transplanted into mutant embryos. ErbB4 signalling events within the hindbrain therefore provide patterning information to cranial paraxial mesenchyme that is essential for the proper migration of neural crest cells.The developmental pattern of filamin gene expression has been studied in mouse embryos by using in situ hybridization. The probes used were isoform specific, (35)S-labeled antisense complementary ribonucleic acids (cRNAs) to the 3; untranslated region (3; UTR) of muscle-specific and nonmuscle-specific filamin genes. Northern blot and in situ hybridization results showed that nonmuscle-specific filamin transcripts had a size of 9.5 kb and were expressed in all nonmuscle tissues. Labeling was most intense in tissues containing a substantial proportion of epithelial and smooth muscle cells. Muscle-specific filamin transcripts had a size of 10 kb and were expressed primarily in cardiac and skeletal muscle. The expression of muscle-specific filamin messenger ribonucleicacids (mRNAs) was detected in heart at 8.0 days after coitum, whereas that in the myotomes of somites was not detected until 10.5 days after coitum. The expression of muscle-specific filamin mRNAs in heart and in skeletal muscle continued through the subsequent days of myogenesis. The results showed that muscle-specific filamin gene transcripts are detected before the formation of myotubes in vivo. This is the first study of filamin gene expression at the early stages of skeletal muscle development. Dev Dyn 2000;217:99-108.Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) transmit their signals through four transmembrane receptors that are designated FGFR1-4. Alternative splicing in the extracellular region of FGFR1-3 generates receptor variants with different ligand binding affinities. Thus two types of transmembrane receptors (IIIb and IIIc isoforms) have been identified for FGFR2 and FGFR3, and the existence of analogous variants has been postulated for FGFR1 based on its genomic structure. However, only a single full-length transmembrane FGFR1 variant (FGFR1-IIIc) has been identified so far. Here we describe the cloning of a full-length cDNA encoding FGFR1-IIIb from a mouse skin wound cDNA library. This receptor isoform was expressed at the highest levels in a subset of sebaceous glands of the skin and in neurons of the hippocampus and the cerebellum. FGFR1-IIIb was expressed in L6 rat skeletal muscle myoblasts and used in cross-linking and receptor binding studies. FGF-1 was found to bind the receptor with high affinity, whereas FGF-2, -10, and -7 bound with significantly lower affinities. Despite their apparently similar but low affinities, FGF-10 but not FGF-7 induced the activation of p44/42 mitogen-activated protein kinase in FGFR1-IIIb-expressing L6 myoblasts and stimulated mitogenesis in these cells, demonstrating that this new receptor variant is a functional transmembrane receptor for FGF-10.We previously reported that fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) acts not only on osteoblasts to stimulate osteoclastic bone resorption indirectly but also on mature osteoclasts directly. In this study, we investigated the mechanism of this direct action of FGF-2 on mature osteoclasts using mouse and rabbit osteoclast culture systems. FGF-2 stimulated pit formation resorbed by isolated rabbit osteoclasts moderately from low concentrations (>/=10(-12) m), whereas at high concentrations (>/=10(-9) m) it showed stimulation on pit formation resorbed by unfractionated bone cells very potently. FGF-2 (>/=10(-12) m) also increased cathepsin K and MMP-9 mRNA levels in mouse and rabbit osteoclasts. Among FGF receptors (FGFR1 to 4) only FGFR1 was detected on isolated mouse osteoclasts, whereas all FGFRs were identified on mouse osteoblasts. FGF-2 (>/=10(-12) m) up-regulated the phosphorylation of cellular proteins, including p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase, and increased the kinase activity of immunoprecipitated FGFR1 in mouse osteoclasts. The stimulation of FGF-2 on mouse and rabbit osteoclast functions was abrogated by PD-98059, a specific inhibitor of p42/p44 MAP kinase. These results strongly suggest that FGF-2 acts directly on mature osteoclasts through activation of FGFR1 and p42/p44 MAP kinase, causing the stimulation of bone resorption at physiological or pathological concentrations.We describe a novel nuclear factor called mitotic chromosome-associated protein (MCAP), which belongs to the poorly understood BET subgroup of the bromodomain superfamily. Expression of the 200-kDa MCAP was linked to cell division, as it was induced by growth stimulation and repressed by growth inhibition. The most notable feature of MCAP was its association with chromosomes during mitosis, observed at a time when the majority of nuclear regulatory factors were released into the cytoplasm, coinciding with global cessation of transcription. Indicative of its predominant interaction with euchromatin, MCAP localized on mitotic chromosomes with exquisite specificity: (i) MCAP-chromosome association became evident subsequent to the initiation of histone H3 phosphorylation and early chromosomal condensation; and (ii) MCAP was absent from centromeres, the sites of heterochromatin. Supporting a role for MCAP in G(2)/M transition, microinjection of anti-MCAP antibody into HeLa cell nuclei completely inhibited the entry into mitosis, without abrogating the ongoing DNA replication. These results suggest that MCAP plays a role in a process governing chromosomal dynamics during mitosis.The L-type alpha(1C) (Ca(v)1.2) calcium channel is the major calcium entry pathway in cardiac and smooth muscle. We inactivated the Ca(v)1.2 gene in two independent mouse lines that had indistinguishable phenotypes. Homozygous knockout embryos (Ca(v)1. 2-/-) died before day 14.5 postcoitum (p.c.). At day 12.5 p.c., the embryonic heart contracted with identical frequency in wild type (+/+), heterozygous (+/-), and homozygous (-/-) Ca(v)1.2 embryos. Beating of isolated embryonic cardiomyocytes depended on extracellular calcium and was blocked by 1 microm nisoldipine. In (+/+), (+/-), and (-/-) cardiomyocytes, an L-type Ba(2+) inward current (I(Ba)) was present that was stimulated by Bay K 8644 in all genotypes. At a holding potential of -80 mV, nisoldipine blocked I(Ba) of day 12.5 p.c. (+/+) and (+/-) cells with two IC(50) values of approximately 0.1 and approximately 1 microm. Inhibition of I(Ba) of (-/-) cardiomyocytes was monophasic with an IC(50) of approximately 1 microm. The low affinity I(Ba) was also present in cardiomyocytes of homozygous alpha(1D) (Ca(v)1.3) knockout embryos at day 12.5 p.c. These results indicate that, up to day 14 p.c., contraction of murine embryonic hearts requires an unidentified, low affinity L-type like calcium channel.Mutations in either LIS1 or DCX are the most common cause for type I lissencephaly. Here we report that LIS1 and DCX interact physically both in vitro and in vivo. Epitope-tagged DCX transiently expressed in COS cells can be co-immunoprecipitated with endogenous LIS1. Furthermore, endogenous DCX could be co-immunoprecipitated with endogenous LIS1 in embryonic brain extracts, demonstrating an in vivo association. The two protein products also co-localize in transfected cells and in primary neuronal cells. In addition, we demonstrate homodimerization of DCX in vitro. Using fragments of both LIS1 and DCX, the domains of interaction were mapped. LIS1 and DCX interact with tubulin and microtubules. Our results suggest that addition of DCX and LIS1 to tubulin enhances polymerization in an additive fashion. In in vitro competition assays, when LIS1 is added first, DCX competes with LIS1 in its binding to microtubules, but when DCX is added prior to the addition of LIS1 it enhances the binding of LIS1 to microtubules. We conclude that LIS1 and DCX cross-talk is important to microtubule function in the developing cerebral cortex.Whereas total loss of Lis1 is lethal, disruption of one allele of the Lis1 gene results in brain abnormalities, indicating that developing neurons are particularly sensitive to a reduction in Lis1 dosage. Here we show that Lis1 is enriched in neurons relative to levels in other cell types, and that Lis1 interacts with the microtubule motor cytoplasmic dynein. Production of more Lis1 in non-neuronal cells increases retrograde movement of cytoplasmic dynein and leads to peripheral accumulation of microtubules. These changes may reflect neuron-like dynein behaviours induced by abundant Lis1. Lis1 deficiency produces the opposite phenotype. Our results indicate that abundance of Lis1 in neurons may stimulate specific dynein functions that function in neuronal migration and axon growth.The Listeria monocytogenes surface protein InlB promotes bacterial entry into mammalian cells. Here, we identify a cellular surface receptor required for InlB-mediated entry. Treatment of mammalian cells with InlB protein or infection with L. monocytogenes induces rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of Met, a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) for which the only known ligand is Hepatocyte Growth Factor (HGF). Like HGF, InlB binds to the extracellular domain of Met and induces "scattering" of epithelial cells. Experiments with Met-positive and Met-deficient cell lines demonstrate that Met is required for InlB-dependent entry of L. monocytogenes. InlB is a novel Met agonist that induces bacterial entry through exploitation of a host RTK pathway.Semaphorins are known to act as chemorepulsive molecules that guide axons during neural development. Sema4C, a group 4 semaphorin, is a transmembrane semaphorin of unknown function. The cytoplasmic domain of Sema4C contains a proline-rich region that may interact with some signaling proteins. In this study, we demonstrate that Sema4C is enriched in the adult mouse brain and associated with PSD-95 isoforms containing PDZ (PSD-95/DLG/ZO-1) domains, such as PSD-95/SAP90, PSD-93/chapsin110, and SAP97/DLG-1, which are concentrated in the post-synaptic density of the brain. In the neocortex, S4C is enriched in the synaptic vesicle fraction and Triton X-100 insoluble post-synaptic density fraction. Immunostaining for Sema4C overlaps that for PSD-95 in superficial layers I-IV of the neocortex. In neocortical culture, S4C is colocalized with PSD-95 in neurons, with a dot-like pattern along the neurites. Sema4C thus may function in the cortical neurons as a bi-directional transmembrane ligand through interacting with PSD-95.LIS1, a microtubule-associated protein, is required for neuronal migration, but the precise mechanism of LIS1 function is unknown. We identified a LIS1 interacting protein encoded by a mouse homolog of NUDE, a nuclear distribution gene in A. nidulans and a multicopy suppressor of the LIS1 homolog, NUDF. mNudE is located in the centrosome or microtubule organizing center (MTOC), and interacts with six different centrosomal proteins. Overexpression of mNudE dissociates gamma-tubulin from the centrosome and disrupts microtubule organization. Missense mutations that disrupt LIS1 function block LIS1-mNudE binding. Moreover, misexpression of the LIS1 binding domain of mNudE in Xenopus embryos disrupts the architecture and lamination of the CNS. Thus, LIS1-mNudE interactions may regulate neuronal migration through dynamic reorganization of the MTOC.Mutations in mammalian Lis1 (Pafah1b1) result in neuronal migration defects. Several lines of evidence suggest that LIS1 participates in pathways regulating microtubule function, but the molecular mechanisms are unknown. Here, we demonstrate that LIS1 directly interacts with the cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain (CDHC) and NUDEL, a murine homolog of the Aspergillus nidulans nuclear migration mutant NudE. LIS1 and NUDEL colocalize predominantly at the centrosome in early neuroblasts but redistribute to axons in association with retrograde dynein motor proteins. NUDEL is phosphorylated by Cdk5/p35, a complex essential for neuronal migration. NUDEL and LIS1 regulate the distribution of CDHC along microtubules, and establish a direct functional link between LIS1, NUDEL, and microtubule motors. These results suggest that LIS1 and NUDEL regulate CDHC activity during neuronal migration and axonal retrograde transport in a Cdk5/p35-dependent fashion.Disruption of one allele of the LIS1 gene causes a severe developmental brain abnormality, type I lissencephaly. In Aspergillus nidulans, the LIS1 homolog, NUDF, and cytoplasmic dynein are genetically linked and regulate nuclear movements during hyphal growth. Recently, we demonstrated that mammalian LIS1 regulates dynein functions. Here we characterize NUDEL, a novel LIS1-interacting protein with sequence homology to gene products also implicated in nuclear distribution in fungi. Like LIS1, NUDEL is robustly expressed in brain, enriched at centrosomes and neuronal growth cones, and interacts with cytoplasmic dynein. Furthermore, NUDEL is a substrate of Cdk5, a kinase known to be critical during neuronal migration. Inhibition of Cdk5 modifies NUDEL distribution in neurons and affects neuritic morphology. Our findings point to cross-talk between two prominent pathways that regulate neuronal migration.Human Prostate Specific Membrane Antigen (PSMA), also known as folate hydrolase I (FOLH1), is a 750-amino acid type II membrane glycoprotein, which is primarily expressed in normal human prostate epithelium and is upregulated in prostate cancer, including metastatic disease. We have cloned and sequenced the mouse homolog of PSMA, which we have termed Folh1, and have found that it is not expressed in the mouse prostate, but primarily in the brain and kidney. We have demonstrated that Folh1, like its human counterpart, is a glutamate-preferring carboxypeptidase, which has at least two enzymatic activities: (1) N-acetylated alpha-linked L-amino dipeptidase (NAALADase), an enzyme involved in regulation of excitatory signaling in the brain, and (2) a gamma-glutamyl carboxypeptidase (folate hydrolase). The 2,256-nt open reading frame of Folh1 encodes for a 752-amino acid protein, with 86% identity and 91% similarity to the human PSMA amino acid sequence. Cells transfected with Folh1 gained both NAALADase and folate hydrolase activities. Examination of tissues for NAALADase activity correlated with the mRNA expression pattern for Folh1. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) revealed Folh1 maps to only one locus in the mouse genome, Chromosome 7D1-2.The LIS1-encoded protein (Lis1) plays a role in brain development because a hemizygous deletion or mutation of the human gene causes neuronal migration disorders, such as Miller-Dieker syndrome (MDS) or isolated lissencephaly sequence (ILS). Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we have isolated a novel protein that interacts with mouse Lis1 (mLis1) which is termed mouse NudE-like protein (mNudE-L) because of its 49% amino acid conservation with NudE, a protein involved in nuclear migration in Aspergillus nidulans. GST pull-down assays and co-immunoprecipitation of fusion proteins expressed in mammalian cells confirmed the interaction of mLis1 and mNudE-L. mNudE-L gives rise to a approximately 2.3 kb mRNA and encodes an ORF corresponding to approximately 38 kDa protein. The overall amino acid sequence of mNudE-L is 49-95% identical to proteins found in a variety of organisms, thus establishing mNudE-L as a new member of a protein family. The hallmark of this family is an N-terminal region predicted to form a coiled-coil domain. We show that mNudE-L and mLis1 are coexpressed in the postnatal and adult cerebral cortices and in the Purkinje neurons of the cerebellum. In contrast to mLis1, mNudE-L transcripts are absent in the mitral cell layer of the olfactory bulb and in the inward migrating granular neurons of the developing cerebellum. Mutant mLis1 proteins modelling mutations found in human lissencephaly patients fail to interact with mNudE-L, raising the possibility that phenotypic changes result, in part, from the inability of mutant Lis1 proteins to interact with the human NudE-L polypeptide.In response to stress stimulants, cells activate opposing signaling pathways for cell survival and programmed cell death. p21-activated protein kinase gamma-PAK is involved in both cell survival and cell death pathways. Many stress stimulants activate gamma-PAK as a full-length enzyme and as a proteolytic fragment. Caspase-mediated proteolytic activation parallels cell death and appears to be a pro-apoptotic factor in stress-induced cell death. Here, we show that activation of full-length gamma-PAK promotes cell survival and suppresses stress-induced cell death. Expression of constitutively active gamma-PAK-T402E, which mimics activated full-length gamma-PAK, stimulates cell survival of BALB3T3 fibroblasts in response to tumor necrosis factor alpha, growth factor withdrawal, and UVC light. This stimulation of cell survival is mainly due to protection of cells from cell death rather than by stimulation of proliferation. Expression of gamma-PAK-T402E increases phosphorylation of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family protein Bad and protects from cell death induced by ectopic expression of Bad. In response to tumor necrosis factor alpha, expression of gamma-PAK-T402E increases the early but reduces the late activation of ERK, JNK, and p38. Our results indicate that the ubiquitous gamma-PAK may have a crucial function in cell survival by regulating the pro-apoptotic activity of Bad and the stress-induced activation of ERK, JNK, and p38 pathways.The overlapping expression profile of MEF2 and the class-II histone deacetylase, HDAC7, led us to investigate the functional interaction and relationship between these regulatory proteins. HDAC7 expression inhibits the activity of MEF2 (-A, -C, and -D), and in contrast MyoD and Myogenin activities are not affected. Glutathione S-transferase pulldown and immunoprecipitation demonstrate that the repression mechanism involves direct interactions between MEF2 proteins and HDAC7 and is associated with the ability of MEF2 to interact with the N-terminal 121 amino acids of HDAC7 that encode repression domain 1. The MADS domain of MEF2 mediates the direct interaction of MEF2 with HDAC7. MEF2 inhibition by HDAC7 is dependent on the N-terminal repression domain and surprisingly does not involve the C-terminal deacetylase domain. HDAC7 interacts with CtBP and other class-I and -II HDACs suggesting that silencing of MEF2 activity involves corepressor recruitment. Furthermore, we show that induction of muscle differentiation by serum withdrawal leads to the translocation of HDAC7 from the nucleus into the cytoplasm. This work demonstrates that HDAC7 regulates the function of MEF2 proteins and suggests that this class-II HDAC regulates this important transcriptional (and pathophysiological) target in heart and muscle tissue. The nucleocytoplasmic trafficking of HDAC7 and other class-II HDACs during myogenesis provides an ideal mechanism for the regulation of HDAC targets during mammalian development and differentiation.We have identified the integrin alpha(v)beta3 as a ligand for mouse gp49B1, thus identifying a new class of ligand for a member of the family of inhibitory immunoreceptors that bear C2-type immunoglobulin-like domains. The specific interaction was shown by both cell-protein and cell-cell binding assays. In addition, we found that the interaction of alpha(v)beta3 with gp49B1 on bone marrow-derived mouse mast cells inhibited antigen-induced immunoglobulin E-mediated cell activation. Because neither gp49B1 nor alpha(v)beta3 exhibit substantive allelic variation, their newly appreciated interaction may reflect an innate pathway for down-regulating the activity of mast cells.Glutamate receptor interacting protein (GRIP) is a member of the PDZ domain-containing protein family that is localized in the postsynaptic density area. This protein has been reported to interact specifically with the C-termini of AMPA-selective glutamate receptor channel subunits, GluRalpha2 and GluRalpha3 through its PDZ domains. To clarify the physiological functions of GRIP, we cloned mouse GRIP1, and found that there are three sites for alternative splicing and two putative translational start codons by characterizing GRIP1 cDNA clones and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction products. Metabolic labeling of COS-7 cells expressing two N-terminal GRIP1 proteins demonstrated that these proteins differed in their pattern of palmitoylation. These findings suggested that the molecular diversity of GRIP1 underlies the localization and functional heterogeneity of this protein.Lissencephaly is a severe brain malformation in humans. To study the function of the gene mutated in lissencephaly (LIS1), we deleted the first coding exon from the mouse Lis1 gene. The deletion resulted in a shorter protein (sLIS1) that initiates from the second methionine, a unique situation because most LIS1 mutations result in a null allele. This mutation mimics a mutation described in one lissencephaly patient with a milder phenotype. Homozygotes are early lethal, although heterozygotes are viable and fertile. Most strikingly, the morphology of cortical neurons and radial glia is aberrant in the developing cortex, and the neurons migrate more slowly. This is the first demonstration, to our knowledge, of a cellular abnormality in the migrating neurons after Lis1 mutation. Moreover, cortical plate splitting and thalomocortical innervation are also abnormal. Biochemically, the mutant protein is not capable of dimerization, and enzymatic activity is elevated in the embryos, thus a demonstration of the in vivo role of LIS1 as a subunit of PAF-AH. This mutation allows us to determine a hierarchy of functions that are sensitive to LIS1 dosage, thus promoting our understanding of the role of LIS1 in the developing cortex.Disruption of the signaling pathways mediated by the receptor tyrosine kinase Tek/Tie2 has shown that this receptor plays a pivotal role in vascularization of the developing embryo. In this report, we have utilized the tetracycline-responsive binary transgenic system to overcome the early lethal cardiovascular defects associated with the tekDeltasp null allele in order to investigate the role of Tek in later stages of vessel growth. We show for the first time in vivo that synchronized loss of tek expression correlates with rapid endothelial cell apoptosis in hemorrhagic regions of the embryo, demonstrating an ongoing requirement for Tek-mediated signal transduction in vascular maintenance.Tuberous sclerosis (TS) is characterized by the development of hamartomas in various organs and is caused by a germ-line mutation in either TSC1 or TSC2 tumor suppressor genes. From the symptomatic resemblance among TS patients, involvement of TSC1 and TSC2 products in a common pathway has been suggested. Here, to analyze the function of the Tsc1 product, we established a line of Tsc1 (TSC1 homologue) knockout mouse by gene targeting. Heterozygous Tsc1 mutant (Tsc1(+/-)) mice developed renal and extra-renal tumors such as hepatic hemangiomas. In these tumors, loss of wild-type Tsc1 allele was observed. Homozygous Tsc1 mutants died around embryonic days 10.5-11.5, frequently associated with neural tube unclosure. As a whole, phenotypes of Tsc1 knockout mice resembled those of Tsc2 knockout mice previously reported, suggesting that the presumptive common pathway for Tsc1 and Tsc2 products may also exist in mice. Notably, however, development of renal tumors in Tsc1(+/-) mice was apparently slower than that in Tsc2(+/-) mice. The Tsc1 knockout mouse described here will be a useful model to elucidate the function of Tsc1 and Tsc2 products as well as pathogenesis of TS.The absence of the fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), encoded by the FMR1 gene, is responsible for pathologic manifestations in the Fragile X Syndrome, the most frequent cause of inherited mental retardation. FMRP is an RNA-binding protein associated with polysomes as part of a messenger ribonucleoprotein (mRNP) complex. Although its function is poorly understood, various observations suggest a role in local protein translation at neuronal dendrites and in dendritic spine maturation. We present here the identification of CYFIP1/2 (Cytoplasmic FMRP Interacting Proteins) as FMRP interactors. CYFIP1/2 share 88% amino acid sequence identity and represent the two members in humans of a highly conserved protein family. Remarkably, whereas CYFIP2 also interacts with the FMRP-related proteins FXR1P/2P, CYFIP1 interacts exclusively with FMRP. FMRP--CYFIP interaction involves the domain of FMRP also mediating homo- and heteromerization, thus suggesting a competition between interaction among the FXR proteins and interaction with CYFIP. CYFIP1/2 are proteins of unknown function, but CYFIP1 has recently been shown to interact with the small GTPase Rac1, which is implicated in development and maintenance of neuronal structures. Consistent with FMRP and Rac1 localization in dendritic fine structures, CYFIP1/2 are present in synaptosomal extracts.Semaphorins are a family of secreted and membrane-associated proteins involved in growth cone guidance during development. Here, we describe the interaction of Semaphorin4F (Sema4F) with the post-synaptic density protein SAP90/PSD-95. Using the yeast two-hybrid system and coprecipitation assays we were able to show an interaction between the extreme C-terminus of Sema4F and the PDZ domains of SAP90/PSD-95. Heterologous coexpression of a chimeric EphrinB1/Semaphorin4F protein with SAP90/PSD-95 in COS cells leads to translocation of SAP90/PSD-95 from the cytosol to the membrane. Deletion analysis shows that this translocation activity of Sema4F is completely dependent on the presence of the last three C-terminal amino acids. In addition, Sema4F immunoreactivity is present in synaptosome fractions and enriched in post-synaptic density fractions. Consistently, in cultured hippocampal neurons, we demonstrate punctate colocalization of Sema4F and SAP90/PSD-95 in dendrites, furthermore we found colocalization of Sema4F with synapsin1 suggesting a synaptic localization. Our data implicate a new functional context for semaphorins at glutamatergic synapses.Recently, we demonstrated that mutations in the Sry-related HMG box gene Sox18 underlie vascular and hair follicle defects in the mouse allelic mutants ragged (Ra) and RaJ. Ra mice display numerous anomalies in the homozygote including, oedema, peritoneal secretions, and are almost completely naked. Sox18 and the MADS box transcription factor, Mef2C, are expressed in developing endothelial cells. Null mutants in Sox18 and Mef2c display overlapping phenotypic abnormalities, hence, we investigated the relationship between these two DNA binding proteins. We report here the direct interaction between MEF2C and SOX18 proteins, and establish that these proteins are coexpressed in vivo in endothelial cell nuclei. MEF2C expression potentiates SOX18-mediated transcription in vivo and regulates the function of the SOX18 activation domain. Interestingly, MEF2C fails to interact or co-activate transcription with the Ra or RaJ mutant SOX18 proteins. These results suggest that MEF2C and SOX18 may be important partners directing the transcriptional regulation of vascular development.Interferon-gamma is a pivotal cytokine in the protective response to tuberculosis. In its absence rampant bacterial growth results in tissue destruction and death. While macrophage activation is key, this pleiotropic cytokine has other secondary but significant roles. To investigate these roles, both intravenous and aerosol infection of the IFN-gamma gene disrupted (GKO) mouse was performed. For the first time we describe the very similar growth of bacteria, during the initial phase of infection, between control and GKO mice. During this initial phase, however, very different histopathologic consequences between control and GKO mice were observed. Key observations included an early increased accumulation of granulocytes and a much more rapid and pronounced interstitial pneumonia in the GKO mice. As infection developed, GKO mice mounted an antigen-specific response; however, lymphocyte activation was much more rapid in these mice. Of interest is the fact that this increased rapidity occurred prior to significant differences in bacterial number. Taken together these data support a role for IFN-gamma in limiting both initial cellular recruitment and acquired lymphocytic responses to mycobacterial infection. This role may be key in surviving the kind of chronic stimulatory disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis.Studies with the myogenic basic helix-loop-helix and MADS box factors suggest that efficient transactivation is dependent on the recruitment of the steroid receptor coactivator (SRC) and the cofactors p300 and p300/CBP-associated factor. SRCs have been demonstrated to recruit CARM1 (coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase-1), a member of the S-adenosyl-l-methionine-dependent PRMT1-5 (protein-arginine N-methyltransferase-1-5) family, which catalyzes the methylation of arginine residues. This prompted us to investigate the functional role of CARM1/PRMT4 during skeletal myogenesis. We demonstrate that CARM1 and the SRC cofactor GRIP-1 cooperatively stimulate the activity of myocyte enhancer factor-2C (MEF2C). Moreover, there are direct interactions among MEF2C, GRIP-1, and CARM1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated the in vivo recruitment of MEF2 and CARM1 to the endogenous muscle creatine kinase promoter in a differentiation-dependent manner. Furthermore, CARM1 is expressed in somites during embryogenesis and in the nuclei of muscle cells. Treatment of myogenic cells with the methylation inhibitor adenosine dialdehyde or tet-regulated CARM1 "antisense" expression did not affect expression of MyoD. However, inhibition of CARM1 inhibited differentiation and abrogated the expression of the key transcription factors (myogenin and MEF2) that initiate the differentiation cascade. This work clearly demonstrates that the arginine methyltransferase CARM1 potentiates myogenesis and supports the positive role of arginine methylation in mammalian differentiation.Twenty diabetes susceptibility loci on 12 mouse chromosomes have been identified to control the development of type 1 diabetes at the level of either initiation of insulitis or progression from insulitis to overt diabetes or both. Previously, we demonstrated that the genetic control of T-cell proliferative unresponsiveness in nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice is linked to Idd4 on mouse chromosome 11. Here, we show by congenic mapping of three newly generated NOD.B6Idd4 diabetes-resistant mouse strains that Idd4 is limited to a 5.2-cM interval of chromosome 11. This B6-derived region expressed in NOD.B6Idd4A mice maps between the D11Nds1 (43.8 cM) and D11Mit38/D11Mit325 (49.0 cM) markers and dramatically reduces the development of both insulitis and type 1 diabetes. NOD.B6Idd4B and NOD.B6Idd4C mice, which carry a smaller B6-derived segment of chromosome 11 that spans <5.2 cM distal to D11Nds1, exhibit protection against type 1 diabetes with the restoration of T-cell proliferation. Our findings suggest that diabetes resistance conferred by Idd4 may be mediated by the Idd4.1 and Idd4.2 subloci. Idd4.1 is localized in the D11Nds1 interval that influences both diabetes and insulitis. Idd4.2 is localized within the D11Mit38/325 interval that mainly influences diabetes incidence and restores T-cell proliferative responsiveness. Three potential candidate genes, platelet activating factor acetylhydrolase Ib1, nitric oxide synthase-2, and CC chemokine genes, are localized in the 5.2-cM interval.The elastic fibre system has a principal role in the structure and function of various types of organs that require elasticity, such as large arteries, lung and skin. Although elastic fibres are known to be composed of microfibril proteins (for example, fibrillins and latent transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta-binding proteins) and polymerized elastin, the mechanism of their assembly and development is not well understood. Here we report that fibulin-5 (also known as DANCE), a recently discovered integrin ligand, is an essential determinant of elastic fibre organization. fibulin-5-/- mice generated by gene targeting exhibit a severely disorganized elastic fibre system throughout the body. fibulin-5-/- mice survive to adulthood, but have a tortuous aorta with loss of compliance, severe emphysema, and loose skin (cutis laxa). These tissues contain fragmented elastin without an increase of elastase activity, indicating defective development of elastic fibres. Fibulin-5 interacts directly with elastic fibres in vitro, and serves as a ligand for cell surface integrins alphavbeta3, alphavbeta5 and alpha9beta1 through its amino-terminal domain. Thus, fibulin-5 may provide anchorage of elastic fibres to cells, thereby acting to stabilize and organize elastic fibres in the skin, lung and vasculature.Integrins connect the extracellular matrix with the cell interior, and transduce signals through interactions of their cytoplasmic tails with cytoskeletal and signaling proteins. Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we isolated a novel splice variant (filamin-Bvar-1) of the filamentous actin cross-linking protein, filamin-B, that interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of the integrin beta1A and beta1D subunits. RT-PCR analysis showed weak, but wide, expression of filamin-Bvar-1 and a similar splice variant of filamin-A (filamin-Avar-1) in human tissues. Furthermore, alternative splice variants of filamin-B and filamin-C, from which the flexible hinge-1 region is deleted (DeltaH1), were induced during in vitro differentiation of C2C12 mouse myoblasts. We show that both filamin-Avar-1 and filamin-Bvar-1 bind more strongly than their wild-type isoforms to different integrin beta subunits. The mere presence of the high-affinity binding site for beta1A is not sufficient for targeting the filamin-Bvar-1 construct to focal contacts. Interestingly, the simultaneous deletion of the H1 region is required for the localization of filamin-B at the tips of actin stress fibers. When expressed in C2C12 cells, filamin-Bvar-1(DeltaH1) accelerates their differentiation into myotubes. Furthermore, filamin-B variants lacking the H1 region induce the formation of thinner myotubes than those in cells containing variants with this region. These findings suggest that specific combinations of filamin mRNA splicing events modulate the organization of the actin cytoskeleton and the binding affinity for integrins.Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is an autosomal recessive degenerative disease caused by a deficiency of frataxin, a conserved mitochondrial protein of unknown function. Mitochondrial iron accumulation, loss of iron-sulfur cluster-containing enzymes and increased oxidative damage occur in yeast and mouse frataxin-depleted mutants as well as tissues and cell lines from FRDA patients, suggesting that frataxin may be involved in export of iron from the mitochondria, synthesis of iron-sulfur clusters and/or protection from oxidative damage. We have previously shown that yeast frataxin has structural and functional features of an iron storage protein. In this study we have investigated the function of human frataxin in Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. When expressed in E.coli, the mature form of human frataxin assembles into a stable homopolymer that can bind approximately 10 atoms of iron per molecule of frataxin. The iron-loaded homopolymer can be detected on non-denaturing gels by either protein or iron staining demonstrating a stable association between frataxin and iron. As analyzed by gel filtration and electron microscopy, the homopolymer consists of globular particles of approximately 1 MDa and ordered rod-shaped polymers of these particles that accumulate small electron-dense cores. When the human frataxin precursor is expressed in S.cerevisiae, the mitochondrially generated mature form is separated by gel filtration into monomer and a high molecular weight pool of >600 kDa. A high molecular weight pool of frataxin is also present in mouse heart indicating that frataxin can assemble under native conditions. In radiolabeled yeast cells, human frataxin is recovered by immunoprecipitation with approximately five atoms of (55)Fe bound per molecule. These findings suggest that FRDA results from decreased mitochondrial iron storage due to frataxin deficiency which may impair iron metabolism, promote oxidative damage and lead to progressive iron accumulation.We have recently isolated a mouse ortholog of human GTF2IRD1 that is related to GTF2I. GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I proteins are characterized by the presence of multiple helix-loop-helix domains and a leucine zipper motif. Both paralogs are closely linked and deleted hemizygously in individuals with Williams syndrome, a dominant genetic condition characterized by unique neurocognitive and behavioral features. We have isolated and analyzed the sequence of bacterial artificial chromosome clones from the syntenic mouse chromosome 5 region that contains Gtf2ird1 and Gtf2i as well as a neighboring gene, Ncf1. Gtf2ird1 is composed of 31 exons spanning >100 kb on mouse chromosome 5 and is located between Cyln2 and Gtf2i. Gtf2i is composed of 34 exons spanning about 77 kb. Ncf1, located downstream of Gtf2i, consists of 11 exons that extend over 8 kb. The gene organization of Gtf2ird1, Gtf2i, and Ncf1 is conserved in mice and humans, although the intronic regions are more compact in the mouse genome. The helix-loop-helix repeats of Gtf2ird1 and Gtf2i are encoded separately on adjacent exons and were generated by independent genomic rearrangements. These studies contribute to our knowledge of transcription factor defects and their pathogenesis in haploinsufficiency conditions.Prop1 is one of several transcription factors important for the development of the pituitary gland. Downstream targets of PROP1 and other critical pituitary transcription factors remain largely unknown. We have generated a partial expression profile of the developing pituitary gland containing over 350 transcripts, using cDNA subtractive hybridization between Prop1(df/df) and wild-type embryonic pituitary gland primordia. Numerous classes of genes including transcription factors, membrane associated molecules, and cell cycle regulators were identified in this study. Of the transcripts, 34% do not have sequence similarity to known genes, but are similar to ESTs, and 4% represent novel sequences. Pituitary gland expression of a number of clones was verified using in situ hybridization. Several members of the Wnt signaling pathway were identified in the developing pituitary gland. The frizzled2 receptor, Apc, beta-catenin, groucho, and a novel isoform of TCF4 (officially named Tcf7l2) were identified in developing pituitary libraries. Three N-terminal alternatively spliced Tcf7l2 isoforms are reported here, each of which lacks a DNA-binding domain. Functional studies indicate that these isoforms can act as endogenous inhibitors of Wnt signaling in some contexts. This is the first report of Tcf7l2 and Fzd2 expression in the developing pituitary. These molecules may be important in mediating Wnt signaling during pituitary ontogeny. We expect other transcripts from these libraries to be involved in pituitary gland development.Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) induces the breakdown of cell junction and the dispersion of colonies of epithelial cells, providing a model system for the investigation of the molecular mechanisms of one of the important aspects of tumorogenesis. We have previously reported that the SH2-domain-containing inositol 5\'phosphatase (SHIP)-1 binds to c-Met, and potentiated HGF-mediated branching tubulogenesis. In this study, we describe the establishment of MDCK cell lines which express MycHis-tagged SHIP-1 at different levels. Expression of SHIP-1 in MDCK cells at a high level resulted in cell morphology characteristic of an epithelial-mesenchymal like transition; cells lost cortical actin, developed actin stress fibers and gained spontaneous motility without treatment of HGF. When the level of MycHis-tagged SHIP-expression was relatively low, transfectants partially lost cortical actin and phalloidin stained puncta appeared at cell-cell junctions even in the absence of HGF. The treatment of MAP kinase inhibitor, PD98059, did not influence SHIP-1 mediated alteration of adherens-junction of MDCK cells, while, phosphatidylinositol 3 (PI 3)- kinase inhibitor, LY294002, drastically reduced SHIP-1 mediated phenotype. Furthermore, expression of a mutant SHIP-1 lacking catalytic activity in MDCK cells did not alter the cortical actin distribution and HGF-mediated MAP and Akt kinase-phosphorylation, but suppressed HGF induced cell dispersion, suggesting that phosphatase activity is important for cytoskeleton rearrangement and cell dispersion.CLIP-170 is a plus-end tracking protein which may act as an anticatastrophe factor. It has been proposed to mediate the association of dynein/dynactin to microtubule (MT) plus ends, and it also binds to kinetochores in a dynein/dynactin-dependent fashion, both via its C-terminal domain. This domain contains two zinc finger motifs (proximal and distal), which are hypothesized to mediate protein-protein interactions. LIS1, a protein implicated in brain development, acts in several processes mediated by the dynein/dynactin pathway by interacting with dynein and other proteins. Here we demonstrate colocalization and direct interaction between CLIP-170 and LIS1. In mammalian cells, LIS1 recruitment to kinetochores is dynein/dynactin dependent, and recruitment there of CLIP-170 is dependent on its site of binding to LIS1, located in the distal zinc finger motif. Overexpression of CLIP-170 results in a zinc finger-dependent localization of a phospho-LIS1 isoform and dynactin to MT bundles, raising the possibility that CLIP-170 and LIS1 regulate dynein/dynactin binding to MTs. This work suggests that LIS1 is a regulated adapter between CLIP-170 and cytoplasmic dynein at sites involved in cargo-MT loading, and/or in the control of MT dynamics.In cells, molecular motors operate in polarized sorting of molecules, although the steering mechanisms of motors remain elusive. In neurons, the kinesin motor conducts vesicular transport such as the transport of synaptic vesicle components to axons and of neurotransmitter receptors to dendrites, indicating that vesicles may have to drive the motor for the direction to be correct. Here we show that an AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate) receptor subunit--GluR2-interacting protein (GRIP1)--can directly interact and steer kinesin heavy chains to dendrites as a motor for AMPA receptors. As would be expected if this complex is functional, both gene targeting and dominant negative experiments of heavy chains of mouse kinesin showed abnormal localization of GRIP1. Moreover, expression of the kinesin-binding domain of GRIP1 resulted in accumulation of the endogenous kinesin predominantly in the somatodendritic area. This pattern was different from that generated by the overexpression of the kinesin-binding scaffold protein JSAP1 (JNK/SAPK-associated protein-1, also known as Mapk8ip3), which occurred predominantly in the somatoaxon area. These results indicate that directly binding proteins can determine the traffic direction of a motor protein.Classical inwardly rectifying K+ channels (Kir2.0) are responsible for maintaining the resting membrane potential near the K+ equilibrium potential in various cells, including neurons. Although Kir2.3 is known to be expressed abundantly in the forebrain, its precise localization has not been identified. Using an antibody specific to Kir2.3, we examined the subcellular localization of Kir2.3 in mouse brain. Kir2.3 immunoreactivity was detected in a granular pattern in restricted areas of the brain, including the olfactory bulb (OB). Immunoelectron microscopy of the OB revealed that Kir2.3 immunoreactivity was specifically clustered on the postsynaptic membrane of asymmetric synapses between granule cells and mitral/tufted cells. The immunoprecipitants for Kir2.3 obtained from brain contained PSD-95 and chapsyn-110, PDZ domain-containing anchoring proteins. In vitro binding assay further revealed that the COOH-terminal end of Kir2.3 is responsible for the association with these anchoring proteins. Therefore, the Kir channel may be involved in formation of the resting membrane potential of the spines and, thus, would affect the response of N-methyl-D-aspartic acid receptor channels at the excitatory postsynaptic membrane.Hormone-activated nuclear receptors (NR) bind to specific regulatory DNA elements associated with their target genes and recruit coactivator proteins to remodel chromatin structure, recruit RNA polymerase, and activate transcription. The p160 coactivators (e.g., SRC-1, GRIP1, and ACTR) bind directly to activated NR and can recruit a variety of secondary coactivators. We have established a transient-transfection assay system under which the activity of various NR is highly or completely dependent on synergistic cooperation among three classes of coactivators: a p160 coactivator, the protein methyltransferase CARM1, and any of the three protein acetyltransferases, p300, CBP, or p/CAF. The three-coactivator functional synergy was only observed when low levels of NR were expressed and was highly or completely dependent on the methyltransferase activity of CARM1 and the acetyltransferase activity of p/CAF, but not the acetyltransferase activity of p300. Other members of the protein arginine methyltransferase family, which methylate different protein substrates than CARM1, could not substitute for CARM1 to act synergistically with p300 or p/CAF. A ternary complex of GRIP1, CARM1, and p300 or CBP was demonstrated in cultured mammalian cells, supporting a physiological role for the observed synergy. The transfection assay described here is a valuable new tool for investigating the mechanism of coactivator function and demonstrates the importance of multiple coactivators, including CARM1 and its specific protein methyltransferase activity, in transcriptional activation.In a gene trap screen we recovered a mouse mutant line in which an insertion generated a null allele of the Brd4 gene. Brd4 belongs to the Fsh/Brd family, a group of structurally related proteins characterized by the association of two bromodomains and one extraterminal domain. Members of this family include Brd2/Ring3/Fsrg1 in mammals, fs(1)h in Drosophila, and Bdf1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Brd4 heterozygotes display pre- and postnatal growth defects associated with a reduced proliferation rate. These mice also exhibit a variety of anatomical abnormalities: head malformations, absence of subcutaneous fat, cataracts, and abnormal liver cells. In primary cell cultures, heterozygous cells also display reduced proliferation rates and moderate sensitivity to methyl methanesulfonate. Embryos nullizygous for Brd4 die shortly after implantation and are compromised in their ability to maintain an inner cell mass in vitro, suggesting a role in fundamental cellular processes. Finally, sequence comparisons suggest that Brd4 is likely to correspond to the Brd-like element of the mediator of transcriptional regulation isolated by Y. W. Jiang, P. Veschambre, H. Erdjument-Bromage, P. Tempst, J. W. Conaway, R. C. Conaway, and R. D. Kornberg (Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95:8538-8543, 1998) and the Brd4 mutant phenotype is discussed in light of this result. Together, our results provide the first genetic evidence for an in vivo role in mammals for a member of the Fsh/Brd family.AP2 is the best-characterized member of the family of heterotetrameric clathrin adaptor complexes that play pivotal roles in many vesicle trafficking pathways within the cell. AP2 functions in clathrin-mediated endocytosis, the process whereby cargo enters the endosomal system from the plasma membrane. We describe the structure of the 200 kDa AP2 "core" (alpha trunk, beta2 trunk, mu2, and sigma2) complexed with the polyphosphatidylinositol headgroup mimic inositolhexakisphosphate at 2.6 A resolution. Two potential polyphosphatidylinositide binding sites are observed, one on alpha and one on mu2. The binding site for Yxxphi endocytic motifs is buried, indicating that a conformational change, probably triggered by phosphorylation in the disordered mu2 linker, is necessary to allow Yxxphi motif binding. A model for AP2 recruitment and activation is proposed.The AP1 complex is one of a family of heterotetrameric clathrin-adaptor complexes involved in vesicular trafficking between the Golgi and endosomes. The complex has two large subunits, gamma and beta1, which can be divided into trunk, hinge, and appendage domains. The 1.8 A resolution structure of the gamma appendage is presented. The binding site for the known gamma appendage ligand gamma-synergin is mapped through creation of point mutations designed on the basis of the structure. We also show that Eps15, a protein believed to be involved in vesicle formation at the plasma membrane, is also a ligand of gamma appendage and binds to the same site as gamma-synergin. This observation explains the demonstrated brefeldinA (BFA)-sensitive colocalization of Eps15 and AP1 at the Golgi complex.Stimulation of fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (FGFR-1) is known to result in phosphorylation of tyrosine 766 and the recruitment and subsequent activation of phospholipase C-gamma (PLC-gamma). To assess the role of tyrosine 766 in endothelial cell function, we generated endothelial cells expressing a chimeric receptor, composed of the extracellular domain of the PDGF receptor-alpha and the intracellular domain of FGFR-1. Mutation of tyrosine 766 to phenylalanine prevented PLC-gamma activation and resulted in a reduced phosphorylation of FRS2 and reduced activation of the Ras/MEK/MAPK pathway relative to the wild-type chimeric receptor. However, FGFR-1-mediated MAPK activation was not dependent on PKC activation or intracellular calcium, both downstream mediators of PLC-gamma activation. We report that the adaptor protein Shb is also able to bind tyrosine 766 in the FGFR-1, via its SH2 domain, resulting in its subsequent phosphorylation. Overexpression of an SH2 domain mutant Shb caused a dramatic reduction in FGFR-1-mediated FRS2 phosphorylation with concomitant perturbment of the Ras/MEK/MAPK pathway. Expression of the chimeric receptor mutant and the Shb SH2 domain mutant resulted in a similar reduction in FGFR-1-mediated mitogenicity. We conclude, that Shb binds to tyrosine 766 in the FGFR-1 and regulates FGF-mediated mitogenicity via FRS2 phosphorylation and the subsequent activation of the Ras/MEK/MAPK pathway.Coordinate induction of phase 2 proteins and elevation of glutathione protect cells against the toxic and carcinogenic effects of electrophiles and oxidants. All inducers react covalently with thiols at rates that are closely related to their potencies. Inducers disrupt the cytoplasmic complex between the actin-bound protein Keap1 and the transcription factor Nrf2, thereby releasing Nrf2 to migrate to the nucleus where it activates the antioxidant response element (ARE) of phase 2 genes and accelerates their transcription. We cloned, overexpressed, and purified murine Keap1 and demonstrated on native gels the formation of complexes of Keap1 with the Neh2 domain of Nrf2 and their concentration-dependent disruption by inducers such as sulforaphane and bis(2-hydroxybenzylidene)acetone. The kinetics, stoichiometry, and order of reactivities of the most reactive of the 25 cysteine thiol groups of Keap1 have been determined by tritium incorporation from [(3)H]dexamethasone mesylate (an inducer and irreversible modifier of thiols) and by UV spectroscopy with sulforaphane, 2,2\'-dipyridyl disulfide and 4,4\'-dipyridyl disulfide (titrants of thiol groups), and two closely related Michael reaction acceptors [bis(2- and 4-hydroxybenzylidene)acetones] that differ 100-fold in inducer potency and the UV spectra of which are bleached by thiol addition. With large excesses of these reagents nearly all thiols of Keap1 react, but sequential reaction with three successive single equivalents (per cysteine residue) of dipyridyl disulfides revealed excellent agreement with pseudo-first order kinetics, rapid successive declines in reaction velocity, and the stoichiometric formation of two equivalents of thiopyridone per reacted cysteine. This finding suggests that reaction of cysteine thiols is followed by rapid formation of protein disulfide linkages. The most reactive residues of Keap1 (C(257), C(273), C(288), and C(297)) were identified by mapping the dexamethasone-modified cysteines by mass spectrometry of tryptic peptides. These residues are located in the intervening region between BTB and Kelch repeat domains of Keap1 and probably are the direct sensors of inducers of the phase 2 system.Angiopoietin-1 (Ang-1) and angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) have been identified as ligands with different effector functions of the vascular assembly and maturation-mediating receptor tyrosine kinase Tie-2. To understand the molecular interactions of the angiopoietins with their receptor, we have studied the binding of Ang-1 and Ang-2 to the Tie-2 receptor. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay-based competition assays and co-immunoprecipitation experiments analyzing the binding of Ang-1 and Ang-2 to truncation mutants of the extracellular domain of Tie-2 showed that the first Ig-like loop of Tie-2 in combination with the epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like repeats (amino acids 1-360) is required for angiopoietin binding. The first Ig-like domain or the EGF-like repeats alone are not capable of binding Ang-1 and Ang-2. Concomitantly, we made the surprising finding that Tie-2 exon-2 knockout mice do express a mutated Tie-2 protein that lacks 104 amino acids of the first Ig-like domain. This mutant Tie-2 receptor is functionally inactive as shown by the lack of ligand binding and receptor phosphorylation. Collectively, the data show that the first 104 amino acids of the Tie-2 receptor are essential but not sufficient for angiopoietin binding. Conversely, the first 360 amino acids (Ig-like domain plus EGF-like repeats) of the Tie-2 receptor are necessary and sufficient to bind both Ang-1 and Ang-2, which suggests that differential receptor binding is not likely to be responsible for the different functions of Ang-1 and Ang-2.The proteoglycan NG2 is expressed by immature glial cells in the developing and adult central nervous system. Using the COOH-terminal region of NG2 as bait in a yeast two-hybrid screen, we identified the glutamate receptor interaction protein GRIP1, a multi-PDZ domain protein, as an interacting partner. NG2 exhibits a PDZ binding motif at the extreme COOH terminus which binds to the seventh PDZ domain of GRIP1. In addition to the published expression in neurons, GRIP1 is expressed by immature glial cells. GRIP1 is known to bind to the GluRB subunit of the AMPA glutamate receptor expressed by subpopulations of neurons and immature glial cells. In cultures of primary oligodendrocytes, cells coexpress GluRB and NG2. A complex of NG2, GRIP1, and GluRB can be precipitated from transfected mammalian cells and from cultures of primary oligodendrocytes. Furthermore, NG2 and GRIP can be coprecipitated from developing brain tissue. These data suggest that GRIP1 acts as a scaffolding molecule clustering NG2 and AMPA receptors in immature glia. In view of the presence of synaptic contacts between neurons and NG2-positive glial cells in the hippocampus and the close association of NG2-expressing glial cells with axons, we suggest a role for the NG2.AMPA receptor complex in glial-neuronal recognition and signaling.Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha) and its downstream transcription factor nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappa B) suppress glucocorticoid action, contributing to tissue resistance to glucocorticoids in several pathologic inflammatory states. p160 nuclear receptor coactivators on the other hand, contribute to the transcriptional signal of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) through interaction with it via LXXLL motifs in their nuclear receptor-binding (NRB) domain. To discover TNF alpha-induced factors that regulate GR activity at the coactivator level, we performed yeast two-hybrid screening using the NRB domain of the glucocorticoid receptor-interacting protein 1 (GRIP1) as bait. We found that FLICE-associated huge protein (FLASH), which transduces TNF alpha and Fas ligand signals, bound the NRB domain of GRIP1 at a region between the second and third LXXLL motifs. FLASH suppressed both GR transactivation and GRIP1 enhancement of the glucocorticoid signal and inhibited the physical interaction between GR and the GRIP1 NRB domain. Transfected green fluorescent protein-fused FLASH was located in both the cytoplasm and nucleus, while endogenous FLASH shifted its subcellular localization from the cytoplasm into the nucleus in response to TNF alpha. FLASH antisense and super-repressor I kappa B alpha inhibited the action of TNF alpha independently of each other and additively. These findings indicate that FLASH participates in TNF alpha-induced blockade of GR transactivation at the nuclear receptor coactivator level, upstream and independently of NF-kappa B.We have explored the effects of two members of the p160 coregulator family on energy homeostasis. TIF2-/- mice are protected against obesity and display enhanced adaptive thermogenesis, whereas SRC-1-/- mice are prone to obesity due to reduced energy expenditure. In white adipose tissue, lack of TIF2 decreases PPARgamma activity and reduces fat accumulation, whereas in brown adipose tissue it facilitates the interaction between SRC-1 and PGC-1alpha, which induces PGC-1alpha\'s thermogenic activity. Interestingly, a high-fat diet increases the TIF2/SRC-1 expression ratio, which may contribute to weight gain. These results reveal that the relative level of TIF2/SRC-1 can modulate energy metabolism.Intracellular type I platelet activating factor-acetylhydrolase is a phospholipase that consists of a dimer of two homologous catalytic subunits alpha1 and alpha2 as well as LIS1, a product of the causative gene for type I lissencephaly. LIS1 plays an important role in neuronal migration during brain development, but the in vivo function of the catalytic subunits remains unclear. In this study, we generated alpha1- and a2-deficient mice by targeted disruption. alpha1(-/-) mice are indistinguishable from wild-type mice, whereas alpha2(-/-) male mice show a significant reduction in testis size. Double-mutant male mice are sterile because of severe impairment of spermatogenesis. Histological examination revealed marked degeneration at the spermatocyte stage and an increase of apoptotic cells in the seminiferous tubules. The catalytic subunits are expressed at high levels in testis as well as brain in mice. In wild-type mice, alpha2 is expressed in all seminiferous tubule cell types, whereas alpha1 is expressed only in the spermatogonia. This expression pattern parallels the finding that deletion of both subunits induces a marked loss of germ cells at an early spermatogenic stage. We also found that the LIS1 protein levels, but not the mRNA levels, were significantly reduced in alpha2(-/-) and double-mutant mice, suggesting that the catalytic subunits, especially alpha2, are a determinant of LIS1 expression level.The cytoplasmic domains (tails) of heterodimeric integrin adhesion receptors mediate integrins\' biological functions by binding to cytoplasmic proteins. Most integrin beta tails contain one or two NPXYF motifs that can form beta turns. These motifs are part of a canonical recognition sequence for phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domains, protein modules that are present in a wide variety of signaling and cytoskeletal proteins. Indeed, talin and ICAP1-alpha bind to integrin beta tails by means of a PTB domain-NPXY ligand interaction. To assess the generality of this interaction we examined the binding of a series of recombinant PTB domains to a panel of short integrin beta tails. In addition to the known integrin-binding proteins, we found that Numb (a negative regulator of Notch signaling) and Dok-1 (a signaling adaptor involved in cell migration) and their isolated PTB domain bound to integrin tails. Furthermore, Dok-1 physically associated with integrin alpha IIb beta 3. Mutations of the integrin beta tails confirmed that these interactions are canonical PTB domain-ligand interactions. First, the interactions were blocked by mutation of an NPXY motif in the integrin tail. Second, integrin class-specific interactions were observed with the PTB domains of Dab, EPS8, and tensin. We used this specificity, and a molecular model of an integrin beta tail-PTB domain interaction to predict critical interacting residues. The importance of these residues was confirmed by generation of gain- and loss-of-function mutations in beta 7 and beta 3 tails. These data establish that short integrin beta tails interact with a large number of PTB domain-containing proteins through a structurally conserved mechanism.Tie2/Tek is an endothelial cell receptor tyrosine kinase that induces signal transduction pathways involved in cell migration upon angiopoietin-1 (Ang1) stimulation. To address the importance of the various tyrosine residues of Tie2 in signal transduction, we generated a series of Tie2 mutants and examined their signaling properties. Using this approach in conjunction with a phosphorylation state-specific antibody, we identified tyrosine residue 1106 on Tie2 as an Ang1-dependent autophosphorylation site that mediates binding and phosphorylation of the downstream-of-kinase-related (Dok-R) docking protein. This tyrosine residue is contained within a unique interaction motif for the phosphotyrosine binding domain of Dok-R, and the pleckstrin homology domain of Dok-R further contributes to Tie2 binding in a phosphatidylinositol 3\'-kinase-dependent manner. Introduction of a Tie2 mutant lacking tyrosine residue 1106 into endothelial cells interferes with Dok-R phosphorylation in response to Ang1. Furthermore, this mutant is unable to restore the migration potential of endothelial cells derived from mice lacking Tie2. Together, these findings demonstrate that tyrosine residue 1106 on Tie2 is critical for coupling downstream cell migration signal transduction pathways with Ang1 stimulation in endothelial cells.We have accumulated information of the coding sequences of uncharacterized human genes, which are known as KIAA genes, and the number of these genes exceeds 2000 at present. As an extension of this sequencing project, we recently have begun to accumulate mouse KIAA-homologous cDNAs, because it would be useful to prepare a set of human and mouse homologous cDNA pairs for further functional analysis of the KIAA genes. We herein present the entire sequences of 400 mouse KIAA cDNA clones and 4 novel cDNA clones which were incidentally identified during this project. Most of clones entirely sequenced in this study were selected by computer-assisted analysis of terminal sequences of the cDNAs. The average size of the 404 cDNA sequences reached 5.3 kb and that of the deduced amino acid sequences from these cDNAs was 868 amino acid residues. The results of sequence analyses of these clones showed that single mouse KIAA cDNAs bridged two different human KIAA cDNAs in some cases, which indicated that these two human KIAA cDNAs were derived from single genes although they had been supposed to originate from different genes. Furthermore, we successfully mapped all the mouse KIAA cDNAs along the genome using a recently published mouse genome draft sequence.NOR-1/NR4A3 is an "orphan member" of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily. NOR-1 and its close relatives Nurr1 and Nur77 are members of the NR4A subgroup of nuclear receptors. Members of the NR4A subgroup are induced through multiple signal transduction pathways. They have been implicated in cell proliferation, differentiation, T-cell apoptosis, chondrosarcomas, neurological disorders, inflammation, and atherogenesis. However, the mechanism of transcriptional activation, coactivator recruitment, and agonist-mediated activation remain obscure. Hence, we examined the molecular basis of NOR-1-mediated activation. We observed that NOR-1 trans-activates gene expression in a cell- and target-specific manner; moreover, it operates in an activation function (AF)-1-dependent manner. The N-terminal AF-1 domain delimited to between amino acids 1 and 112, preferentially recruits the steroid receptor coactivator (SRC). Furthermore, SRC-2 modulates the activity of the AF-1 domain but not the C-terminal ligand binding domain (LBD). Homology modeling indicated that the NOR-1 LBD was substantially different from that of hRORbeta, a closely related AF-2-dependent receptor. In particular, the hydrophobic cleft characteristic of nuclear receptors was replaced with a very hydrophilic surface with a distinct topology. This observation may account for the inability of this nuclear receptor LBD to efficiently mediate cofactor recruitment and transcriptional activation. In contrast, the N-terminal AF-1 is necessary for cofactor recruitment and can independently conscript coactivators. Finally, we demonstrate that the purine anti-metabolite 6-mercaptopurine, a widely used antineoplastic and anti-inflammatory drug, activates NOR-1 in an AF-1-dependent manner. Additional 6-mercaptopurine analogs all efficiently activated NOR-1, suggesting that the signaling pathways that modulate proliferation via inhibition of de novo purine and/or nucleic acid biosynthesis are involved in the regulation NR4A activity. We hypothesize that the NR4A subgroup mediates the genotoxic stress response and suggest that this subgroup may function as sensors that respond to genotoxicity.We have cloned two mouse cDNAs encoding previously unidentified membrane-bound dipeptidases [membrane-bound dipeptidase-2 (MBD-2) and membrane-bound dipeptidase-3 (MBD-3)] from membrane-bound dipeptidase-1 (MBD-1) deficient mice (Habib, G.M., Shi, Z-Z., Cuevas, A.A., Guo, Q., Matzuk, M.M., and Lieberman, M.W. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 4859-4863). These enzymes are closely related to MBD-1 (EC 3.4.13.19), which is known to cleave leukotriene D4 (LTD4) and cystinyl-bis-glycine. MBD-2 cDNA is 56% identical to MBD-1 with a predicted amino acid identity of 33%. The MBD-3 and MBD-1 cDNAs share a 55% nucleotide identity and a 39% predicted amino acid sequence identity. All three genes are tightly linked on the same chromosome. Expression of MBD-2 and MBD-3 in Cos cells indicated that both are membrane-bound through a glycosylphosphatidyl-inositol linkage. MBD-2 cleaves leukotriene D4 (LTD4) but not cystinyl-bis-glycine, while MBD-3 cleaves cystinyl-bis-glycine but not LTD4. MBD-1 is expressed at highest levels in kidney, lung, and heart and is absent in spleen, while MBD-2 is expressed at highest levels in lung, heart, and testis and at somewhat lower levels in spleen. Of the tissues examined, MBD-3 expression was detected only in testis. Our identification of a second enzyme capable of cleaving LTD4 raises the possibility that clearance of LTD4 during asthma and in related inflammatory conditions may be mediated by more than one enzyme.Heterozygous deletions of 17p13.3 result in the human neuronal migration disorders isolated lissencephaly sequence (ILS) and the more severe Miller-Dieker syndrome (MDS). Mutations in PAFAH1B1 (the gene encoding LIS1) are responsible for ILS and contribute to MDS, but the genetic causes of the greater severity of MDS are unknown. Here, we show that the gene encoding 14-3-3epsilon (YWHAE), one of a family of ubiquitous phosphoserine/threonine-binding proteins, is always deleted in individuals with MDS. Mice deficient in Ywhae have defects in brain development and neuronal migration, similar to defects observed in mice heterozygous with respect to Pafah1b1. Mice heterozygous with respect to both genes have more severe migration defects than single heterozygotes. 14-3-3epsilon binds to CDK5/p35-phosphorylated NUDEL and this binding maintains NUDEL phosphorylation. Similar to LIS1, deficiency of 14-3-3epsilon results in mislocalization of NUDEL and LIS1, consistent with reduction of cytoplasmic dynein function. These results establish a crucial role for 14-3-3epsilon in neuronal development by sustaining the effects of CDK5 phosphorylation and provide a molecular explanation for the differences in severity of human neuronal migration defects with 17p13.3 deletions.Mice lacking the epidermal growth factor receptor family member ErbB4 exhibit defects in cranial neural crest cell migration but die by embryonic day 11 because of defective heart development. To examine later phenotypes, we rescued the heart defects in ErbB4 mutant mice by expressing ErbB4 under a cardiac-specific myosin promoter. Rescued ErbB4 mutant mice reach adulthood and are fertile. However, during pregnancy, mammary lobuloalveoli fail to differentiate correctly and lactation is defective. Rescued mice also display aberrant cranial nerve architecture and increased numbers of large interneurons within the cerebellum.Previous in vitro studies showed that the bromodomain binds to acetyllysines on histone tails, leading to the proposal that the domain is involved in deciphering the histone code. However, there is little in vivo evidence supporting the binding of bromodomains to acetylated chromatin in the native environment. Brd4 is a member of the BET family that carries two bromodomains. It associates with mitotic chromosomes, a feature characteristic of the family. Here, we studied the interaction of Brd4 with chromatin in living cells by photobleaching. Brd4 was mobile and interacted with chromatin with a rapid "on and off" mode of binding. This interaction required both bromodomains. Indicating a preferential interaction with acetylated chromatin, Brd4 became less mobile upon increased chromatin acetylation caused by a histone deacetylase inhibitor. Providing biochemical support, salt solubility of Brd4 was markedly reduced upon increased histone acetylation. This change also required both bromodomains. In peptide binding assays, Brd4 avidly bound to di- and tetraacetylated histone H4 and diacetylated H3, but weakly or not at all to mono- and unacetylated H3 and H4. By contrast, it did not bind to unacetylated H4 or H3. Further, Brd4 colocalized with acetylated H4 and H3 in noncentromeric regions of mitotic chromosomes. This colocalization also required both bromodomains. These observations indicate that Brd4 specifically recognizes acetylated histone codes, and this recognition is passed onto the chromatin of newly divided cells.p21-activated protein kinases (PAKs) are a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that are activated by binding of the p21 G proteins Cdc42 or Rac. The ubiquitous PAK-2 (gamma-PAK) is unique among the PAK isoforms because it is also activated through proteolytic cleavage by caspases or caspase-like proteases. In response to stress stimulants such as tumor necrosis factor alpha or growth factor withdrawal, PAK-2 is activated as a full-length enzyme and as a proteolytic PAK-2p34 fragment. Activation of full-length PAK-2 stimulates cell survival, whereas proteolytic activation of PAK-2p34 is involved in programmed cell death. Here we provide evidence that the proapoptotic effect of PAK-2p34 is regulated by subcellular targeting and degradation by the proteasome. Full-length PAK-2 is localized in the cytoplasm, whereas the proteolytic PAK-2p34 fragment translocates to the nucleus. Subcellular localization of PAK-2 is regulated by nuclear localization and nuclear export signal motifs. A nuclear export signal motif within the regulatory domain prevents nuclear localization of full-length PAK-2. Proteolytic activation removes most of the regulatory domain and disrupts the nuclear export signal. The activated PAK-2p34 fragment contains a nuclear localization signal and translocates to the nucleus. However, levels of activated PAK-2p34 are tightly regulated through ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome. Inhibition of degradation by blocking polyubiquitination results in significantly increased levels of PAK-2p34 and as a consequence, in stimulation of programmed cell death. Therefore, nuclear targeting and inhibition of degradation appear to be critical for stimulation of the cell death response by PAK-2p34.Mutations in one allele of the human LIS1 gene cause a severe brain malformation, lissencephaly. Although most LIS1 mutations involve deletions, several point mutations with a single amino acid alteration were described. Patients carrying these mutations reveal variable phenotypic manifestations. We have analyzed the functional importance of these point mutations by examining protein stability, folding, intracellular localization, and protein-protein interactions. Our data suggest that the mutated proteins were affected at different levels, and no single assay could be used to predict the lissencephaly phenotype. Most interesting are those mutant proteins that retain partial folding and interactions. In the case of LIS1 mutated in F31S, the cellular phenotype may be modified by overexpression of specific interacting proteins. Overexpression of the PAF-AH alpha1 subunit dissolved aggregates induced by this mutant protein and increased its half-life. Overexpression of NudE or NudEL localized this mutant protein to spindle poles and kinetochores but had no effect on protein stability. Our results implicate that there are probably different biochemical and cellular mechanisms obstructed in each patient yielding the varied lissencephaly phenotypes.CHD1 is one of a family of nuclear proteins containing two chromodomains, a SWI/SNF-like helicase/ATPase domain and a DNA binding domain. We found that CHD1 co-immunoprecipitates with histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity and that CHD1 also associates with NCoR, a transcriptional corepressor, in yeast two-hybrid and in vitro pull-down assays. NCoR is known to associate with HDACs to effect its repressive activity, suggesting that the predicted chromatin remodeling activity of CHD1 plays a role in this repression. Yeast two-hybrid assays also showed that CHD1 interacts with splicing proteins mKIAA0164, Srp20, and SAF-B. Splicing assays show that CHD1 overexpression can affect alternative splicing. These results suggest that CHD1 may function in both chromatin mediated transcriptional repression and RNA splicing.Platelet-activating factor (PAF, 1-O-alkyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine) is a biologically active lipid mediator. We have previously shown the expression of PAF receptor in neurons and microglia. PAF is produced in the brain from its precursor, and degraded by the enzyme PAF acetylhydrolase. LIS1 is a regulatory subunit of PAF acetylhydrolase, and is identical to a gene whose deletion causes the human neuronal migration disorder, type I lissencephaly. Indeed, Lis1 mutant mice display defects in neuronal migration and layering in vivo, and also in cerebellar granule cell migration in vitro. However, the roles of PAF and the PAF receptor in the neuronal migration remain to be determined. Here, we show that PAF receptor-deficient mice exhibited histological abnormalities in the embryonic cerebellum. PAF receptor-deficient cerebellar granule neurons migrated more slowly in vitro than wild-type neurons, consistent with the observation that a PAF receptor antagonist reduced the migration of wild-type neurons in vitro. Synergistic reduction of neuronal migration was observed in a double mutant of PAF receptor and LIS1. Unexpectedly, PAF affected the migration of PAF receptor-deficient neurons, suggesting a receptor-independent pathway for PAF action. The PAF receptor-independent response to PAF was abolished in granule neurons derived from the double mutant mice. Thus, our results suggest that the migration of cerebellar granule cells is regulated by PAF through receptor-dependent and receptor-independent pathways, and that LIS1 is a pivotal molecule that links PAF action and neuronal cell migration both in vivo and in vitro.Homozygous deletion of the Lis1 gene (Lis1(-/-)) in mouse resulted in early embryonic lethality immediately after embryo implantation by an undefined mechanism. We seek to define the nature of this demise. LIS1 (pafah1b1) is a 46 kDa protein with seven tryptophan-aspartate (WD) repeats. It docks with many proteins and has been implicated in microtubular function, cell division, intercellular transport, and nuclear and cellular motility. Combined Western and quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analyses showed that LIS1 expression from the blastocyst stage required new transcription from the embryonic genome. Consequently, the death of post-implantation embryos may not reflect the first time during development that LIS1 was required, rather, it may reflect the first time following depletion of gametic stores that its actions were essential. Following culture of blastocysts in vitro for 96 hr the inner cell mass (ICM) of null embryos were significantly smaller than ICM of wild-type siblings. Normal blastocyst outgrowths after 96-hr culture had high levels of LIS1 expression in the outer cells of developing ICM and extensive expression in trophoblast cells. Lis1(-/-) embryos had significantly smaller trophoblast nuclei than wild-type embryos. The results show that LIS1 expression is required for the continued normal development of the ICM and optimal trophoblast giant cell formation.The ERBB family of type 1 receptor tyrosine kinases and their ligands have crucial functions during mammopoiesis, but the signaling networks that ultimately regulate ERBB activity in the breast have remained elusive. Here, we show that mice with Cre-lox mediated deletions of both Erbb4 alleles within the developing mammary gland (Erbb4(Flox/Flox)Wap-Cre) fail to accumulate lobuloalveoli or successfully engage lactation at parturition owing, in part, to impaired epithelial proliferation. Analysis of the mammary differentiation factor STAT5 by immunohistochemistry and western blot revealed a complete ablation of STAT5 activation in Erbb4(Flox/Flox)Wap-Cre mammary epithelium at parturition. Consistent with disrupted STAT5 function, Erbb4(Flox/Flox)Wap-Cre mammary glands at parturition failed to express the mammary epithelial differentiation marker NPT2B. Defects in epithelial functional differentiation at parturition were accompanied by a profound reduction in expression of the STAT5-regulated milk genes casein beta and whey acidic protein. We propose that ERBB4 functions as an essential mediator of STAT5 signaling, and that loss of STAT5 activity contributes to the impaired functional differentiation of mammary glands observed in mice containing conditional Erbb4 deletions.The erbB4 gene encodes one of the four members of the mammalian ErbB family of transmembrane tyrosine kinases. The ErbB4 protein plays a role as a receptor for the neuregulins, a large group of structurally related molecules and a few other epidermal growth factor (EGF)-related polypeptides, such as heparin-binding EGF, betacellulin and epiregulin. The importance of this receptor tyrosine kinase in development has been demonstrated by the generation of mice with a targeted inactivation of the erbB4 gene. Such mice die by embryonic day eleven due to defective trabeculation in the heart, precluding analysis of phenotypes at later stages in development and in the adult. Now, using two unique genetic approaches our laboratories succeeded in overcoming this obstacle. In the first approach, the heart defects of ErbB4 null mutant mice were rescued by transgenic expression of an ErbB4 cDNA under a cardiac-specific myosin promoter. This allowed the generation of ErbB4 mutants that develop into adulthood and are fertile. In the second approach, the role of ErbB4 during mammary gland development was specifically addressed by Cre-mediated deletion of both erbB4 alleles within the mammary epithelium. Below we discuss the progress made studying these genetic models in understanding the physiological roles of ErbB4 with a focus on the mammary gland and the nervous system.Lissencephaly is a severe brain malformation caused by impaired neuronal migration. Lis1, a causative gene, functions in an evolutionarily conserved nuclear translocation pathway regulating dynein motor and microtubule dynamics. Whereas microtubule contributions to neuronal motility are incompletely understood, the actin cytoskeleton is essential for crawling cell movement of all cell types investigated. Lis1 haploinsufficiency is shown here to also result in reduced filamentous actin at the leading edge of migrating neurons, associated with upregulation of RhoA and downregulation of Rac1 and Cdc42 activity. Disruption of RhoA function through pharmacological inhibition of its effector kinase, p160ROCK, restores normal Rac1 and Cdc42 activity and rescues the motility defect in Lis1+/- neurons. These data indicate a previously unrecognized role for Lis1 protein in neuronal motility by promoting actin polymerization through the regulation of Rho GTPase activity. This effect of Lis1 on GTPases does not appear to occur through direct Lis1 binding of Rho, but could involve Lis1 effects on Rho modulatory proteins or on microtubule dynamics.Loss-of-function mutations in RELN (encoding reelin) or PAFAH1B1 (encoding LIS1) cause lissencephaly, a human neuronal migration disorder. In the mouse, homozygous mutations in Reln result in the reeler phenotype, characterized by ataxia and disrupted cortical layers. Pafah1b1(+/-) mice have hippocampal layering defects, whereas homozygous mutants are embryonic lethal. Reln encodes an extracellular protein that regulates layer formation by interacting with VLDLR and ApoER2 (Lrp8) receptors, thereby phosphorylating the Dab1 signaling molecule. Lis1 associates with microtubules and modulates neuronal migration. We investigated interactions between the reelin signaling pathway and Lis1 in brain development. Compound mutant mice with disruptions in the Reln pathway and heterozygous Pafah1b1 mutations had a higher incidence of hydrocephalus and enhanced cortical and hippocampal layering defects. Dab1 and Lis1 bound in a reelin-induced phosphorylation-dependent manner. These data indicate genetic and biochemical interaction between the reelin signaling pathway and Lis1.Blood pressure is regulated by a number of key molecules involving G-protein-coupled receptors, ion channels and monomeric small G-proteins. The relative contribution of these different signaling pathways to blood pressure regulation remains to be determined. Tamoxifen-induced, smooth muscle-specific inactivation of the L-type Cav1.2 Ca2+ channel gene in mice (SMAKO) reduced mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) in awake, freely moving animals from 120 +/- 4.5 to 87 +/- 8 mmHg. Phenylephrine (PE)- and angiotensin 2 (AT2)-induced MAP increases were blunted in SMAKO mice, whereas the Rho-kinase inhibitor Y-27632 reduced MAP to the same extent in control and SMAKO mice. Depolarization-induced contraction was abolished in tibialis arteries of SMAKO mice, and development of myogenic tone in response to intravascular pressure (Bayliss effect) was absent. Hind limb perfusion experiments suggested that 50% of the PE-induced resistance is due to calcium influx through the Cav1.2 channel. These results show that Cav1.2 calcium channels are key players in the hormonal regulation of blood pressure and development of myogenic tone.The methylation status of the CpG island located within the ribosomal RNA (rRNA) promoter in human hepatocellular carcinomas and pair-matched liver tissues was analyzed by bisulfite genomic sequencing. Significant hypomethylation of methyl-CpGs in the rRNA promoter was observed in the tumor samples compared with matching normal tissues, which was consistent with the relatively high level of rRNA synthesis in rapidly proliferating tumors. To study the effect of CpG methylation on RNA polymerase I (pol I)-transcribed rRNA genes, we constructed pHrD-IRES-Luc (human rRNA promoter-luciferase reporter). In this plasmid, Kozak sequence of the pGL3-basic vector was replaced by the internal ribosome entry site (IRES) of encephalomyocarditis viral genome to optimize pol I-driven reporter gene expression. Transfection of this plasmid into HepG2 (human) cells revealed reduced pol I-driven luciferase activity with an increase in methylation density at the promoter. Markedly reduced luciferase activity in Hepa (mouse) cells compared with HepG2 (human) cells showed that pHrD-IRES-Luc is transcribed by pol I. Site-specific methylation of human rRNA promoter demonstrated that methylation of CpG at the complementary strands located in the promoter (-9, -102, -347 with respect to the +1 site) inhibited luciferase activity, whereas symmetrical methylation of a CpG in the transcribed region (+152) did not affect the promoter activity. Immunofluorescence studies showed that the methyl-CpG-binding proteins, MBD1, MBD2, MBD3, and MeCP2, are localized both in the nuclei and nucleoli of HepG2 cells. Transient overexpression of MBD2 suppressed luciferase activity specifically from the methylated rRNA promoter, whereas MBD1 and MBD3 inhibited rRNA promoter activity irrespective of the methylation status. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis confirmed predominant association of MBD2 with the endogenous methylated rRNA promoter, which suggests a selective role for MBD2 in the methylation-mediated inhibition of ribosomal RNA gene expression.We have conducted a human cDNA project to predict protein-coding sequences (CDSs) in large cDNAs (> 4 kb) since 1994, and the number of newly identified genes, known as KIAA genes, already exceeds 2000. The ultimate goal of this project is to clarify the physiological functions of the proteins encoded by KIAA genes. To this end, the project has recently been expanded to include isolation and characterization of mouse KIAA-counterpart genes. We herein present the entire sequences and the chromosome loci of 500 mKIAA cDNA clones and 13 novel cDNA clones that were incidentally identified during this project. The average size of the 513 cDNA sequences reached 4.3 kb and that of the deduced amino acid sequences from these cDNAs was 816 amino acid residues. By comparison of the predicted CDSs between mouse and human KIAAs, 12 mKIAA cDNA clones were assumed to be differently spliced isoforms of the human cDNA clones. The comparison of mouse and human sequences also revealed that four pairs of human KIAA cDNAs are derived from single genes. Notably, a homology search against the public database indicated that 4 out of 13 novel cDNA clones were homologous to the disease-related genes.Cytoplasmic dynein has been implicated in numerous aspects of intracellular movement. We recently found dynein inhibitors to interfere with the reorientation of the microtubule cytoskeleton during healing of wounded NIH3T3 cell monolayers. We now find that dynein and its regulators dynactin and LIS1 localize to the leading cell cortex during this process. In the presence of serum, bright diffuse staining was observed in regions of active ruffling. This pattern was abolished by cytochalasin D, and was not observed in cells treated with lysophosphatidic acid, conditions which allow microtubule reorientation but not forward cell movement. Under the same conditions, using total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy, clear punctate dynein/dynactin containing structures were observed along the sides and at the tips of microtubules at the leading edge. Overexpression of dominant negative dynactin and LIS1 cDNAs or injection of antidynein antibody interfered with the rate of cell migration. Together, these results implicate a leading edge cortical pool of dynein in both early and persistent steps in directed cell movement.Recently, it was discovered that herpesvirus-associated ubiquitin-specific protease (HAUSP) in human interacts with p53 protein, and removes the ubiquitin from ubiquitinated p53. Thus, human HAUSP stabilizes the status of p53, induces p53-dependent cell growth repression and apoptosis. In this study, we isolated and characterized a mouse orthologue of HAUSP, mHAUSP. The mHAUSP cDNA was cloned from mouse ES cells by RT-PCR. The open reading frame consists of 3,312 bp and encodes a predicted protein of 1,103 amino acids with a molecular weight of approximately 135 kDa. The N-terminal region contains the Cys, His, and Asp domains, which are highly conserved in all deubiquitinating enzymes. Northern blot analysis revealed that two transcripts were detected in various tissues, with strong expression in brain, lung, thymus, and testis. In vivo and in vitro deubiquitinating enzyme assays demonstrated that mHAUSP has deubiquitinating enzyme activity. The overexpression of mHAUSP reduces the amount of ubiquitinated p53, indicating that it functions as a deubiquitinating enzyme for p53.Adaptor protein (AP) complexes are cytosolic heterotetramers that mediate the sorting of membrane proteins in the secretory and endocytic pathways. AP complexes are involved in the formation of clathrin-coated vesicles (CCVs) by recruiting the scaffold protein, clathrin. AP complexes also play a pivotal role in the cargo selection by recognizing the sorting signals within the cytoplasmic tail of integral membrane proteins. Six distinct AP complexes have been identified. AP-2 mediates endocytosis from the plasma membrane, while AP-1, AP-3 and AP-4 play a role in the endosomal/lysosomal sorting pathways. Moreover, tissue-specific sorting events such as the basolateral sorting in polarized epithelial cells and the biogenesis of specialized organelles including melanosomes and synaptic vesicles are also regulated by members of AP complexes. The application of a variety of methodologies have gradually revealed the physiological role of AP complexes.Pak2 is a serine/threonine kinase that participates in the cellular response to stress. Among the potential substrates for Pak2 is the protein Myc, encoded by the proto-oncogene MYC. Here we demonstrate that Pak2 phosphorylates Myc at three sites (T358, S373, and T400) and affects Myc functions both in vitro and in vivo. Phosphorylation at all three residues reduces the binding of Myc to DNA, either by blocking the requisite dimerization with Max (through phosphorylation at S373 and T400) or by interfering directly with binding to DNA (through phosphorylation at T358). Phosphorylation by Pak2 inhibits the ability of Myc to activate transcription, to sustain cellular proliferation, to transform NIH 3T3 cells in culture, and to elicit apoptosis on serum withdrawal. These results indicate that Pak2 is a negative regulator of Myc, suggest that inhibition of Myc plays a role in the cellular response to stress, and raise the possibility that Pak2 may be the product of a tumor suppressor gene.Induction of a family of phase 2 genes encoding for proteins that protect against the damage of electrophiles and reactive oxygen intermediates is potentially a major strategy for reducing the risk of cancer and chronic degenerative diseases. Many phase 2 genes are regulated by upstream antioxidant response elements (ARE) that are targets of the leucine zipper transcription factor Nrf2. Under basal conditions, Nrf2 resides mainly in the cytoplasm bound to its cysteine-rich, Kelch domain-containing partner Keap1, which is itself anchored to the actin cytoskeleton and represses Nrf2 activity. Inducers disrupt the Keap1-Nrf2 complex by modifying two (C273 and C288) of the 25 cysteine residues of Keap1. The critical role of C273 and C288 was established by (i) their high reactivity when purified recombinant Keap1 was treated with dexamethasone mesylate and the dexamethasone-modified tryptic peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry, and (ii) transfection of keap1 and nrf2 gene-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts with constructs expressing cysteine to alanine mutants of Keap1, and measurement of the ability of cotransfected Nrf2 to repress an ARE-luciferase reporter. Reaction of Keap1 with inducers results in formation of intermolecular disulfide bridges, probably between C273 of one Keap1 molecule and C288 of a second. Evidence for formation of such dimers was obtained by 2D PAGE of extracts of cells treated with inducers, and by the demonstration that whereas C273A and C288A mutants of Keap1 alone could not repress Nrf2 activation of the ARE-luciferase reporter, an equal mixture of these mutant constructs restored repressor activity.The Rho-GTPase Rac1 stimulates actin remodelling at the cell periphery by relaying signals to Scar/WAVE proteins leading to activation of Arp2/3-mediated actin polymerization. Scar/WAVE proteins do not interact with Rac1 directly, but instead assemble into multiprotein complexes, which was shown to regulate their activity in vitro. However, little information is available on how these complexes function in vivo. Here we show that the specifically Rac1-associated protein-1 (Sra-1) and Nck-associated protein 1 (Nap1) interact with WAVE2 and Abi-1 (e3B1) in resting cells or upon Rac activation. Consistently, Sra-1, Nap1, WAVE2 and Abi-1 translocated to the tips of membrane protrusions after microinjection of constitutively active Rac. Moreover, removal of Sra-1 or Nap1 by RNA interference abrogated the formation of Rac-dependent lamellipodia induced by growth factor stimulation or aluminium fluoride treatment. Finally, microinjection of an activated Rac failed to restore lamellipodia protrusion in cells lacking either protein. Thus, Sra-1 and Nap1 are constitutive and essential components of a WAVE2- and Abi-1-containing complex linking Rac to site-directed actin assembly.The 5-hydroxytryptamine type 2A (5-HT(2A)) receptor and the 5-HT(2C) receptor are closely related members of the G-protein-coupled receptors activated by serotonin that share very similar pharmacological profiles and cellular signaling pathways. These receptors express a canonical class I PDZ ligand (SXV) at their C-terminal extremity. Here, we have identified proteins that interact with the PDZ ligand of the 5-HT(2A) and 5-HT(2C) receptors by a proteomic approach associating affinity chromatography using immobilized synthetic peptides encompassing the PDZ ligand and mass spectrometry. We report that both receptor C termini interact with specific sets of PDZ proteins in vitro. The 5-HT(2C) receptor but not the 5-HT(2A) receptor binds to the Veli-3.CASK.Mint1 ternary complex and to SAP102. In addition, the 5-HT(2C) receptor binds more strongly to PSD-95 and MPP-3 than the 5-HT(2A) receptor. In contrast, a robust interaction between the 5-HT(2A) receptor and the channel-interacting PDZ protein CIPP was found, whereas CIPP did not significantly associate with the 5-HT(2C) receptor. We also show that residues located at the -1 position and upstream the PDZ ligand in the C terminus of the 5-HT(2A) and 5-HT(2C) receptors are major determinants in their interaction with specific PDZ proteins. Immunofluorescence and electron microscopy studies strongly suggested that these specific interactions also take place in living cells and that the 5-HT(2) receptor-PDZ protein complexes occur in intracellular compartments. The interaction of the 5-HT(2A) and the 5-HT(2C) receptor with specific sets of PDZ proteins may contribute to their different signal transduction properties.Nuclear distribution gene E-like product (NUDEL) is a mammal homologue of fungal NUDE and is involved in neuronal migration during brain development. High levels of NUDEL were expressed in murine testis as well as brain. During spermatogenesis, NUDEL was not detected until postnatal day 12 (P12), rising to significant levels at P27. NUDEL was localized predominantly along microtubules of the manchette in elongated spermatids. In maturing spermatids, NUDEL was observed only in the centrosomes, while mature testicular spermatozoa did not show any NUDEL expression. These results suggest that NUDEL plays an important role in germ cell formation, including nucleoplasmic transport and nucleus shaping by manchette microtubules.Humans with mutations in either DCX or LIS1 display nearly identical neuronal migration defects, known as lissencephaly. To define subcellular mechanisms, we have combined in vitro neuronal migration assays with retroviral transduction. Overexpression of wild-type Dcx or Lis1, but not patient-related mutant versions, increased migration rates. Dcx overexpression rescued the migration defect in Lis1+/- neurons. Lis1 localized predominantly to the centrosome, and after disruption of microtubules, redistributed to the perinuclear region. Dcx outlined microtubules extending from the perinuclear "cage" to the centrosome. Lis1+/- neurons displayed increased and more variable separation between the nucleus and the preceding centrosome during migration. Dynein inhibition resulted in similar defects in both nucleus-centrosome (N-C) coupling and neuronal migration. These N-C coupling defects were rescued by Dcx overexpression, and Dcx was found to complex with dynein. These data indicate Lis1 and Dcx function with dynein to mediate N-C coupling during migration, and suggest defects in this coupling may contribute to migration defects in lissencephaly.Dyrk1A, a mammalian homolog of the Drosophila minibrain gene, encodes a dual-specificity kinase, involved in neuronal development and in adult brain physiology. In humans, a third copy of DYRK1A is present in Down syndrome (trisomy 21) and has been implicated in the etiology of mental retardation. To further understand this pathology, we searched for Dyrk1A-interacting proteins and identified Arip4 (androgen receptor-interacting protein 4), a SNF2-like steroid hormone receptor cofactor. Mouse hippocampal and cerebellar neurons coexpress Dyrk1A and Arip4. In HEK293 cells and hippocampal neurons, both proteins are colocalized in a speckle-like nuclear subcompartment. The functional interaction of Dyrk1A with Arip4 was analyzed in a series of transactivation assays. Either Dyrk1A or Arip4 alone displays an activating effect on androgen receptor- and glucocorticoid receptor-mediated transactivation, and Dyrk1A and Arip4 together act synergistically. These effects are independent of the kinase activity of Dyrk1A. Inhibition of endogenous Dyrk1A and Arip4 expression by RNA interference showed that both proteins are necessary for the efficient activation of androgen receptor- and glucocorticoid receptor-dependent transcription. As Dyrk1A is an activator of steroid hormone-regulated transcription, the overexpression of DYRK1A in persons with Down syndrome may cause rather broad changes in the homeostasis of steroid hormone-controlled cellular events.Mutations in the Lis1 gene result in lissencephaly (smooth brain), a debilitating developmental syndrome caused by the impaired ability of postmitotic neurons to migrate to their correct destination in the cerebral cortex. Sequence similarities suggest that the LIS1 protein contains a C-terminal seven-blade beta-propeller domain, while the structure of the N-terminal fragment includes the LisH (Lis-homology) motif, a pattern found in over 100 eukaryotic proteins with a hitherto unknown function. We present the 1.75 A resolution crystal structure of the N-terminal domain of mouse LIS1, and we show that the LisH motif is a novel, thermodynamically very stable dimerization domain. The structure explains the molecular basis of a low severity form of lissencephaly.Transcription factor Nrf2 is a major regulator of genes encoding phase 2 detoxifying enzymes and antioxidant stress proteins in response to electrophilic agents and oxidative stress. In the absence of such stimuli, Nrf2 is inactive owing to its cytoplasmic retention by Keap1 and rapid degradation through the proteasome system. We examined the contribution of Keap1 to the rapid turnover of Nrf2 (half-life of less than 20 min) and found that a direct association between Keap1 and Nrf2 is required for Nrf2 degradation. In a series of domain function analyses of Keap1, we found that both the BTB and intervening-region (IVR) domains are crucial for Nrf2 degradation, implying that these two domains act to recruit ubiquitin-proteasome factors. Indeed, Cullin 3 (Cul3), a subunit of the E3 ligase complex, was found to interact specifically with Keap1 in vivo. Keap1 associates with the N-terminal region of Cul3 through the IVR domain and promotes the ubiquitination of Nrf2 in cooperation with the Cul3-Roc1 complex. These results thus provide solid evidence that Keap1 functions as an adaptor of Cul3-based E3 ligase. To our knowledge, Nrf2 and Keap1 are the first reported mammalian substrate and adaptor, respectively, of the Cul3-based E3 ligase system.The angiopoietin (Ang) family of growth factors includes Ang1, Ang2, Ang3, and Ang4, all of which bind to the endothelial receptor tyrosine kinase Tie2. Ang3 (mouse) and Ang4 (human) are interspecies orthologs. In experiments with human endothelial cell lines, Ang3 was identified as an antagonist of Tie2 and Ang4 was identified as an agonist of Tie2. However, the biological roles of Ang3 and Ang4 are unknown. We examined the biological effect of recombinant Ang3 and Ang4 proteins in primary cultured endothelial cells and in vivo in mice. Recombinant Ang3 and Ang4 formed disulfide-linked dimers. Ang4 (400 ng/mL) markedly increased Tie2 and Akt phosphorylation in primary cultured HUVECs whereas Ang3 (400 ng/mL) did not produce significant changes. Accordingly, Ang4, but not Ang3, induced survival and migration in primary cultured HUVECs. Unexpectedly, intravenously administered Ang3 (30 microg) was more potent than Ang4 (30 microg) in phosphorylating the Tie2 receptor in lung tissue from mice in vivo. Accordingly, Ang3 was more potent than Ang4 in phosphorylating Akt in primary cultured mouse lung microvascular endothelial cells. Ang3 and Ang4 both produced potent corneal angiogenesis extending from the limbus across the mouse cornea in vivo. Thus, Ang3 and Ang4 are agonists of Tie2, but mouse Ang3 has strong activity only on endothelial cells of its own species.A cDNA encoding a novel mucin protein, MUC20, was isolated as a gene that is up-regulated in the renal tissues of patients with immunoglobulin A nephropathy. We demonstrate here that the C terminus of MUC20 associates with the multifunctional docking site of Met without ligand activation, preventing Grb2 recruitment to Met and thus attenuating hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-induced transient extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1 and -2 activation. Production of MUC20 reduced HGF-induced matrix metalloproteinase expression and proliferation, which require the Grb2-Ras pathway, whereas cell scattering, branching morphogenesis, and survival via the Gab1/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathways was not affected. Thus, MUC20 reduces HGF-induced activation of the Grb2-Ras pathway but not the Gab1/PI3K pathways. We further demonstrate that the cytoplasmic domain of MUC20 has the ability to oligomerize and that the oligomerization augments its affinity for Met. Taken together, these results suggest that MUC20 is a novel regulator of the Met signaling cascade which has a role in suppression of the Grb2-Ras pathway.Myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) transcription factors play pivotal roles in cardiac, muscle, and neuron gene expression. All products of MEF2 genes have a common amino-terminal DNA binding and dimerization domain, but the four vertebrate MEF2 gene transcripts are alternatively spliced among coding exons to produce splicing isoforms. In MEF2C alone, alternative splice acceptors in the last exon give forms that include or exclude a short domain that we designate gamma. We show that MEF2C is expressed exclusively as gamma- isoforms in heart tissue and predominantly as gamma- in other adult tissues and in differentiating myocytes. MEF2C gamma- isoforms are much more robust than gamma+ forms in activating MEF2-responsive reporters in transfected fibroblasts despite indistinguishable expression levels, and they better synergize with MyoD in promoting myogenic conversion. One-hybrid transcription assays using Gal4-MEF2C fusions give similar distinctions between gamma- and gamma+ isoforms in all cell types tested, including myocytes. Cis effects of gamma on MEF2C DNA binding, dimerization, protein stability, or response to CaM or p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling are not apparent, and the isolated gamma domain represses transcription when fused to Gal4. One phosphoserine residue is present within the gamma domain according to tandem mass spectrometry, and mutation of this residue abolishes gamma-mediated transrepression. A similar activity is present in the constitutive gamma domain and serine phosphoacceptor of MEF2A. Our findings indicate that gamma functions autonomously as a phosphoserine-dependent transrepressor to downregulate transactivation function of MEF2 factors and that alternative splicing and serine phosphorylation converge to provide complex combinatorial control of MEF2C activity.G protein-coupled receptors such as the beta1-adrenergic receptor (beta1AR) must be trafficked to the plasma membrane in order to bind with their extracellular ligands and regulate cellular physiology. By using glutathione S-transferase pull-down techniques, we found that the beta1AR carboxyl terminus directly interacts with the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator-associated ligand (CAL; also known as PIST, GOPC, and FIG), a protein known to be primarily localized to the Golgi apparatus. CAL contains two predicted coiled-coil domains and one PSD-95/Discs-large/ZO-1 homology (PDZ) domain. The beta1AR carboxyl terminus (CT) binds to the PDZ domain of CAL, with the last few amino acids (ESKV) of the beta1AR-CT being the key determinants for the interaction. Mutation of the terminal valine residue resulted in markedly reduced association of the beta1AR-CT with CAL. Numerous other mutations to the ESKV motif also impaired the beta1AR-CT/CAL interaction, suggesting that this motif is close to optimal for association with the CAL PDZ domain. In cells, full-length beta1AR robustly associates with CAL, and this interaction is abolished by mutation of the terminal valine to alanine of the receptor (V477A), as determined by co-immunoprecipitation experiments and immunofluorescence co-localization studies. Consistent with observations that CAL is a Golgi-associated protein, overexpression of CAL reduces surface expression of beta1AR. Interaction with CAL promotes retention of beta1AR within the cell, whereas PSD-95, another beta1AR-associated PDZ domain-containing protein, competitively blocks beta1AR association with CAL and promotes receptor trafficking to the cell surface. These data reveal that CAL, a novel beta1AR-binding partner, modulates beta1AR intracellular trafficking, thereby revealing a new mechanism of regulation for beta1AR anterograde trafficking through the endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi complex to the plasma membrane.The Wnt signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in vertebrate early development and morphogenesis. Duplin (axis duplication inhibitor) interacts with beta-catenin and prevents its binding to Tcf, thereby inhibiting downstream Wnt signaling. Here we show that Duplin is expressed predominantly from early- to mid-stage mouse embryogenesis, and we describe the generation of mice deficient in Duplin. Duplin(-/-) embryos manifest growth retardation from embryonic day 5.5 (E5.5) and developmental arrest accompanied by massive apoptosis at E7.5. The mutant embryos develop into an egg cylinder but do not form a primitive streak or mesoderm. Expression of beta-catenin target genes, including those for T (brachyury), Axin2, and cyclin D1, was not increased in Duplin(-/-) embryos, suggesting that the developmental defect is not simply attributable to upregulation of Wnt signaling caused by the lack of this inhibitor. These results suggest that Duplin plays an indispensable role, likely by a mechanism independent of inhibition of Wnt signaling, in mouse embryonic growth and differentiation at an early developmental stage.The heterotetrameric adaptor proteins (AP complexes) link the outer lattice of clathrin-coated vesicles with membrane-anchored cargo molecules. We report the crystal structure of the core of the AP-1 complex, which functions in the trans-Golgi network (TGN). Packing of complexes in the crystal generates an exceptionally long (1,135-A) unit-cell axis, but the 6-fold noncrystallographic redundancy yields an excellent map at 4-A resolution. The AP-1 core comprises N-terminal fragments of the two large chains, beta1 and gamma, and the intact medium and small chains, micro1 and sigma1. Its molecular architecture closely resembles that of the core of AP-2, the plasma-membrane-specific adaptor, for which a structure has been determined. Both structures represent an "inactive" conformation with respect to binding of cargo with a tyrosine-based sorting signal. TGN localization of AP-1 depends on the small GTPase, Arf1, and the phosphoinositide, PI-4-P. We show that directed mutations of residues at a particular corner of the gamma chain prevent recruitment to the TGN in cells and diminish PI-4-P-dependent, but not Arf1-dependent, liposome binding in vitro.Basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2) is one of the prototype members of a rapidly expanding family of polypeptides. FGF-2 acts on cells via a dual-receptor system consisting of high-affinity tyrosine kinase receptors (FGFR) and low-affinity receptors comprised of heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Following ligand binding and subsequent internalization, both FGF-2 and FGFR1 are translocated to the nucleus where they have activities distinct from those expressed at the cell surface. Despite the growing number of growth factors and receptors shown to translocate to the nucleus, little is known about the mechanisms of internalization and translocation and how these processes are regulated. In the studies reported in this paper, we examined the roles of clathrin-dependent and -independent endocytosis in the uptake of FGFR1 and one of its ligands, FGF-2. While the uptake of FGF-2 occurred at least partly by a caveolar-dependent mechanism, that of FGFR1 was independent of both caveolae and coated pits. Surprisingly, neither the uptake of FGF-2 nor FGFR1 required the activity of the receptor tyrosine kinase. In addition, we identified a cell cycle-dependent pathway of FGFR1 nuclear translocation that appears to be independent of ligand binding.The KY protein has been implicated in a neuromuscular dystrophy in the mouse, but its role in muscle function remains unclear. Here, we show that KY interacts with several sarcomeric cytoskeletal proteins including, amongst others, filamin C and the slow isoform of the myosin-binding protein C. These interactions were confirmed in vitro and because of its central role in skeletal muscle disease, characterized in more detail for filamin C. A role for KY in regulating filamin C function in vivo is supported by the expression analysis of filamin C in the null ky mouse mutant, where distinct irregular subcellular localization of filamin C was found in subsets of muscle fibres, which appears to be a specific outcome of KY deficiency. Furthermore, KY shows protease activity in in vitro assays, and specific degradation of filamin C by KY is shown in transfected cells. Given the enzymatic nature of the KY protein, it is likely that some of the identified partners are catalytic substrates. These results suggest that KY is an intrinsic part of the protein networks underlying the molecular mechanism of several limb-girdle muscular dystrophies, particularly those where interactions between filamin C and disease causing proteins have been shown.Clathrin-coated vesicles (CCVs) are responsible for the transport of proteins between various compartments of the secretory and endocytic systems. Clathrin forms a scaffold around these vesicles that is linked to membranes by clathrin adaptors. The adaptors simultaneously bind to clathrin and to transmembrane proteins and/or phospholipids and can also interact with each other and with other components of the CCV formation machinery. The result is a collection of proteins that can make multiple, moderate strength (microM Kd) interactions and thereby establish the dynamic regulatable networks to drive vesicle genesis at the correct time and place in the cell. This review focuses on the structure of clathrin adaptors and how these structures provide functional information on the mechanism of CCV formation.Correct neuronal migration and positioning during cortical development are essential for proper brain function. Mutations of the LIS1 gene result in human lissencephaly (smooth brain), which features misplaced cortical neurons and disarrayed cerebral lamination. However, the mechanism by which LIS1 regulates neuronal migration remains unknown. Using RNA interference (RNAi), we found that the binding partner of LIS1, NudE-like protein (Ndel1, formerly known as NUDEL), positively regulates dynein activity by facilitating the interaction between LIS1 and dynein. Loss of function of Ndel1, LIS1, or dynein in developing neocortex impairs neuronal positioning and causes the uncoupling of the centrosome and nucleus. Overexpression of LIS1 partially rescues the positioning defect caused by Ndel1 RNAi but not dynein RNAi, whereas overexpression of Ndel1 does not rescue the phenotype induced by LIS1 RNAi. These results provide strong evidence that Ndel1 interacts with LIS1 to sustain the function of dynein, which in turn impacts microtubule organization, nuclear translocation, and neuronal positioning.Ablation of the LIS1-interacting protein Nde1 (formerly mNudE) in mouse produces a small brain (microcephaly), with the most dramatic reduction affecting the cerebral cortex. While cortical lamination is mostly preserved, the mutant cortex has fewer neurons and very thin superficial cortical layers (II to IV). BrdU birthdating revealed retarded and modestly disorganized neuronal migration; however, more dramatic defects on mitotic progression, mitotic orientation, and mitotic chromosome localization in cortical progenitors were observed in Nde1 mutant embryos. The small cerebral cortex seems to reflect both reduced progenitor cell division and altered neuronal cell fates. In vitro analysis demonstrated that Nde1 is essential for centrosome duplication and mitotic spindle assembly. Our data show that mitotic spindle function and orientation are essential for normal development of mammalian cerebral cortex.The National Institutes of Health\'s Mammalian Gene Collection (MGC) project was designed to generate and sequence a publicly accessible cDNA resource containing a complete open reading frame (ORF) for every human and mouse gene. The project initially used a random strategy to select clones from a large number of cDNA libraries from diverse tissues. Candidate clones were chosen based on 5\'-EST sequences, and then fully sequenced to high accuracy and analyzed by algorithms developed for this project. Currently, more than 11,000 human and 10,000 mouse genes are represented in MGC by at least one clone with a full ORF. The random selection approach is now reaching a saturation point, and a transition to protocols targeted at the missing transcripts is now required to complete the mouse and human collections. Comparison of the sequence of the MGC clones to reference genome sequences reveals that most cDNA clones are of very high sequence quality, although it is likely that some cDNAs may carry missense variants as a consequence of experimental artifact, such as PCR, cloning, or reverse transcriptase errors. Recently, a rat cDNA component was added to the project, and ongoing frog (Xenopus) and zebrafish (Danio) cDNA projects were expanded to take advantage of the high-throughput MGC pipeline.Neural progenitor proliferation, differentiation and migration are continually active in the rostral migratory stream of the adult brain. Here, we show that the receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB4 is expressed prominently by the neuroblasts present in the subventricular zone and the rostral migratory stream. The neuregulins (NRG1-NRG3), which have been identified as ErbB4 ligands, are detected either in the stream or in adjacent regions. Mice deficient in ErbB4 expressed under the control of either the nestin or the hGFAP promoter have altered neuroblast chain organization and migration and deficits in the placement and differentiation of olfactory interneurons. These findings suggest that ErbB4 activation helps to regulate the organization of neural chains that form the rostral migratory stream and influences the differentiation of olfactory interneuronal precursors.Mutations in the LIS1 gene cause lissencephaly, a human neuronal migration disorder. LIS1 binds dynein and the dynein-associated proteins Nde1 (formerly known as NudE), Ndel1 (formerly known as NUDEL), and CLIP-170, as well as the catalytic alpha dimers of brain cytosolic platelet activating factor acetylhydrolase (PAF-AH). The mechanism coupling the two diverse regulatory pathways remains unknown. We report the structure of LIS1 in complex with the alpha2/alpha2 PAF-AH homodimer. One LIS1 homodimer binds symmetrically to one alpha2/alpha2 homodimer via the highly conserved top faces of the LIS1 beta propellers. The same surface of LIS1 contains sites of mutations causing lissencephaly and overlaps with a putative dynein binding surface. Ndel1 competes with the alpha2/alpha2 homodimer for LIS1, but the interaction is complex and requires both the N- and C-terminal domains of LIS1. Our data suggest that the LIS1 molecule undergoes major conformational rearrangement when switching from a complex with the acetylhydrolase to the one with Ndel1.APH-1 (anterior pharynx defective) along with nicastrin and PEN-2 (presenilin enhancer) are essential components of the presenilin (PS)-dependent gamma-secretase complex. There exist three murine Aph-1 alleles termed Aph-1a, Aph-1b, and Aph-1c that encode four distinct APH-1 isoforms: APH-1aL and APH-1aS derived from differential splicing of Aph-1a, APH-1b, and APH-1c. To determine the contributions of mammalian APH-1 homologs in formation of functional gamma-secretase complexes, we generated Aph-1a-/- mice and derived immortalized fibroblasts from these embryos. Compared with littermate controls, the development of Aph-1a-/- embryos was dramatically retarded by embryonic day 9.5 and exhibited patterning defects that resemble, but are not identical to, those of Notch1, nicastrin, or PS null embryos. Moreover, in immortalized Aph-1a-/- fibroblasts, the levels of nicastrin, PS fragments, and PEN-2 were dramatically decreased. Consequently, deletion of Aph-1a resulted in significant reduction in levels of high-molecular-weight gamma-secretase complex and secretion of beta-amyloid (Abeta). Importantly, complementation analysis revealed that all mammalian APH-1 isoforms were capable of restoring the levels of nicastrin, PS, and PEN-2, as well as Abeta secretion in Aph-1a-/- cells. Together, our findings establish that APH-1a is the major mammalian APH-1 homolog present in PS-dependent gamma-secretase complexes during embryogenesis and support the view that mammalian APH-1 isoforms define a set of distinct functional gamma-secretase complexes.The semaphorins are a large family of proteins involved in the patterning of both the vascular and the nervous systems. In order to analyze the function of the membrane-bound semaphorin 5A (Sema5A), we generated mice homozygous for a null mutation in the Sema5a gene. Homozygous null mutants die between embryonic development days 11.5 (E11.5) and E12.5, indicating an essential role of Sema5A during embryonic development. Mutant embryos did not show any morphological defects that could account for the lethality of the mutation. A detailed analysis of the vascular system uncovered a role of Sema5A in the remodeling of the cranial blood vessels. In Sema5A null mutants, the complexity of the hierarchically organized branches of the cranial cardinal veins was decreased. Our results represent the first genetic analysis of the function of a class 5 semaphorin during embryonic development and identify a role of Sema5A in the regional patterning of the vasculature.Retinoic acid induced 1 (RAI1) is among the 20 genes identified in the critical region of Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS), a genomic disorder with multiple congenital anomalies associated with a 3.7 Mb heterozygous deletion of 17p11.2. Heterozygous premature termination mutations in RAI1 have been identified recently in SMS patients without detectable deletions. To investigate Rai1 function, we generated a null allele in mice by gene targeting and simultaneously inserted a lacZ reporter gene into the Rai1 locus. X-gal staining of the Rai1(+/-) mice recapitulated the endogenous expression pattern of Rai1. The gene was predominantly expressed in the epithelial cells involved in organogenesis. Obesity and craniofacial abnormalities, which have been reported in SMS mouse models containing a heterozygous deletion of the syntenic SMS critical region, were observed in Rai1(+/-) mice. Thus, haploinsufficiency of Rai1 causes obesity and craniofacial abnormalities in mice. Interestingly, the penetrance of craniofacial anomalies is further reduced in Rai1(+/-) mice. Most homozygous mice died during gastrulation and organogenesis. The surviving Rai1(-/-) mice were growth retarded and displayed malformations in both the craniofacial and the axial skeleton. Using green fluorescence protein and GAL4 DNA binding domain fusions to Rai1, we showed that Rai1 is translocated to the nucleus and it has transactivation activity. Our data are consistent with Rai1 functioning as a transcriptional regulator, document that Rai1 haploinsufficiency is responsible for obesity and craniofacial phenotypes in mice with SMS deletions, and indicate Rai1 is important for embryonic and postnatal developments.Myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) transcription factors play pivotal roles in striated muscle, neuron, and lymphocyte gene expression and are targets of stress- and calcium-mediated signaling. All MEF2 gene products have a common DNA binding and dimerization domain, but MEF2 transcripts are alternatively spliced among coding exons to produce splicing isoforms. In vertebrate MEF2A, -C, and -D, a splice versus no-splice option gives forms that include or exclude a short domain that we designate beta. We show that mRNAs containing beta are expressed predominantly in striated muscle and brain and that splicing to include beta is induced during myocyte differentiation. MEF2 beta+ isoforms are more robust than beta- forms in activating MEF2-responsive reporters despite similar expression levels. One-hybrid transcription assays using Gal4-MEF2 fusions show similar distinctions in the transactivation produced by beta+ versus beta- isoforms in all cell types tested, including myocytes. beta function is position-independent and exists in all MEF2 splicing variant contexts. The activity is not due to cis effects on MEF2 DNA binding or dimerization nor are established transcription factor or coactivator interactions involved. Each MEF2 beta domain contains multiple acidic residues, mutation of which abolishes function. Despite a location between the p38 MAPK docking domain and Thr phosphoacceptors of MEF2A and MEF2C, inclusion of beta does not influence responses of these factors to this signaling pathway. Thus, a conserved pattern of alternative splicing in vertebrate MEF2 genes generates an acidic activation domain in MEF2 proteins selectively in tissues where MEF2 target genes are highly expressed.The epidermal growth factor receptor family member ERBB4 is required for mammary gland development and lactation. ERBB4 activities in the breast are mediated through the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) family member STAT5A, and ERBB4 directly activates STAT5A, in part, through phosphorylation of STAT5A at the regulatory Tyr-694. Here we show that STAT5A regulation by ERBB4 is also mediated through STAT5A serine phosphorylation. Using a reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analysis of proteolytically digested STAT5A coexpressed with ERBB4, we identified STAT5A serine phosphorylations at the previously described Ser-779 and at the novel Ser-127/Ser-128. Immunohistochemistry of wild-type and ERBB4-null mammary glands at late pregnancy showed that ERBB4 expression was required for STAT5A phosphorylation at Ser-779. Independent serine-to-alanine residue substitutions in full-length STAT5A revealed that although STAT5A Ser-779 phosphorylation was dispensable for phosphorylation of STAT5A at Tyr-694 and subsequent DNA binding, Ser-779 was required to stabilize an interaction with ERBB4 and mediate ERBB4-induced STAT5A stimulation of gene expression. STAT5A Ser-127/Ser-128, on the other hand, was required for ERBB4-induced phosphorylation of Tyr-694, whereas Ser-779 and as yet unidentified tyrosine residues were phosphorylated in the absence of Ser-127/Ser-128. In addition, STAT5A S127A/S128A remained associated with ERBB4 but failed to bind DNA or activate transcription in response to ERBB4 coexpression. Our studies demonstrate that phosphorylation of STAT5A at Ser-127/Ser-128 and Ser-779 are obligatory events regulating ERBB4-mediated activation of STAT5A.The covalent modification of proteins by the small ubiquitin-like protein SUMO has been implicated in the regulation of numerous biological processes, including nucleocytoplasmic transport, genomic stability, and gene transcription. Sumoylation occurs by a multienzyme process similar to ubiquitination and, in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is reversed by desumoylating enzymes encoded by the Ulp1 and Smt4/Ulp2 genes. The physiological importance of desumoylation has been revealed by mutations in either gene, which lead to nonoverlapping defects in cell cycle transition and meiosis. Several mammalian Ulp homologues have been identified, but, to date, nothing is known of the phenotypic effects of their loss of function. Here, we describe a random retroviral insertional mutation of one homolog, mouse SENP1/SuPr-2. The mutation causes increased steady-state levels of the sumoylated forms of a number of proteins and results in placental abnormalities incompatible with embryonic development. Our findings provide the first insight into the critical importance of regulating sumoylation in mammals.LIS1 and nuclear distribution gene E (NudE) are partner proteins in a conserved pathway regulating the function of dynein and microtubules. Here, we present data that cytoplasmic LEK1 (cytLEK1), a large protein containing a spectrin repeat and multiple leucine zippers, is a component of this pathway through its direct interaction with NudE, as determined by a yeast two-hybrid screen. We identified the binding domains in each molecule, and coimmunoprecipitation and colocalization studies confirmed the specificity of the interaction between cytLEK1 and NudE. Confocal deconvolution analysis revealed that cytLEK1 exhibits colocalization with endogenous NudE and with the known NudE binding partners, LIS1 and dynein. By localizing the NudE-binding domain of cytLEK1 to a small domain within the molecule, we were able to disrupt cytLEK1 function by using a dominant negative approach in addition to LEK1 knockdown and, thus, examine the role of the cytLEK1-NudE interaction in cells. Consistent with a defect in the LIS1 pathway, disruption of cytLEK1 function resulted in alteration of microtubule organization and cellular shape. The microtubule network of cells became tightly focused around the nucleus and resulted in a rounded cell shape. Additionally, cells exhibited a severe inability to repolymerize their microtubule networks after nocodazole challenge. Taken together, our studies revealed that cytLEK1 is essential for cellular functions regulated by the LIS1 pathway.Nuclear receptors (NRs) regulate target gene transcription through the recruitment of multiple coactivator complexes to the promoter regions of target genes. One important coactivator complex includes a p160 coactivator (GRIP1, SRC-1, or ACTR) and its downstream coactivators (e.g., p300, CARM1, CoCoA, and Fli-I), which contribute to transcriptional activation by protein acetylation, protein methylation, and protein-protein interactions. In this study, we identified a novel NR coactivator, GAC63, which binds to the N-terminal region of p160 coactivators as well as the ligand binding domains of some NRs. GAC63 enhanced transcriptional activation by NRs in a hormone-dependent and GRIP1-dependent manner in transient transfection assays and cooperated synergistically and selectively with other NR coactivators, including GRIP1 and CARM1, to enhance estrogen receptor function. Endogenous GAC63 was recruited to the estrogen-responsive pS2 gene promoter of MCF-7 cells in response to the hormone. Reduction of the endogenous GAC63 level by small interfering RNA inhibited transcriptional activation by the hormone-activated estrogen receptor. Thus, GAC63 is a physiologically relevant part of the p160 coactivator signaling pathway that mediates transcriptional activation by NRs.Regulation of cytoplasmic dynein and microtubule dynamics is crucial for both mitotic cell division and neuronal migration. NDEL1 was identified as a protein interacting with LIS1, the protein product of a gene mutated in the lissencephaly. To elucidate NDEL1 function in vivo, we generated null and hypomorphic alleles of Ndel1 in mice by targeted gene disruption. Ndel1(-/-) mice were embryonic lethal at the peri-implantation stage like null mutants of Lis1 and cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain. In addition, Ndel1(-/-) blastocysts failed to grow in culture and exhibited a cell proliferation defect in inner cell mass. Although Ndel1(+/-) mice displayed no obvious phenotypes, further reduction of NDEL1 by making null/hypomorph compound heterozygotes (Ndel1(cko/-)) resulted in histological defects consistent with mild neuronal migration defects. Double Lis1(cko/+)-Ndel1(+/-) mice or Lis1(+/-)-Ndel1(+/-) mice displayed more severe neuronal migration defects than Lis1(cko/+)-Ndel1(+/)(+) mice or Lis1(+/-)-Ndel1(+/+) mice, respectively. We demonstrated distinct abnormalities in microtubule organization and similar defects in the distribution of beta-COP-positive vesicles (to assess dynein function) between Ndel1 or Lis1-null MEFs, as well as similar neuronal migration defects in Ndel1- or Lis1-null granule cells. Rescue of these defects in mouse embryonic fibroblasts and granule cells by overexpressing LIS1, NDEL1, or NDE1 suggest that NDEL1, LIS1, and NDE1 act in a common pathway to regulate dynein but each has distinct roles in the regulation of microtubule organization and neuronal migration.Brd4 is a mammalian bromodomain protein that binds to acetylated chromatin. Proteomic analysis revealed that Brd4 interacts with cyclinT1 and Cdk9 that constitutes core positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). Brd4 interacted with P-TEFb in the living nucleus through its bromodomain. About half of P-TEFb was bound to the inhibitory subunit and functionally inactive. Brd4 interacted with P-TEFb that was free of the inhibitory subunit. An increase in Brd4 expression led to increased P-TEFb-dependent phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) CTD and stimulation of transcription from promoters in vivo. Conversely, a reduction in Brd4 expression by siRNA reduced CTD phosphorylation and transcription, revealing that Brd4 is a positive regulatory component of P-TEFb. In chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, the recruitment of P-TEFb to a promoter was dependent on Brd4 and was enhanced by an increase in chromatin acetylation. Together, P-TEFb alternately interacts with Brd4 and the inhibitory subunit to maintain functional equilibrium in the cell.This study describes comprehensive polling of transcription start and termination sites and analysis of previously unidentified full-length complementary DNAs derived from the mouse genome. We identify the 5\' and 3\' boundaries of 181,047 transcripts with extensive variation in transcripts arising from alternative promoter usage, splicing, and polyadenylation. There are 16,247 new mouse protein-coding transcripts, including 5154 encoding previously unidentified proteins. Genomic mapping of the transcriptome reveals transcriptional forests, with overlapping transcription on both strands, separated by deserts in which few transcripts are observed. The data provide a comprehensive platform for the comparative analysis of mammalian transcriptional regulation in differentiation and development.Thymocytes undergo apoptosis unless a functional TCR is assembled. Steroid receptor coactivators (SRCs) regulate nuclear receptor-mediated transcription by associated histone acetyltransferase activity. However, it has been a challenge to demonstrate the in vivo function of SRCs due to the overlapping functions among different members of SRCs. In this study, we show that recruitment of SRCs is required for thymic-specific retinoic acid-related orphan receptor gamma (RORgamma)t-regulated thymocyte survival in vivo. An activation function 2 domain, identified at the carboxyl terminus of RORgammat, is responsible for recruiting SRCs. A mutation in the activation function domain (Y479F) of RORgammat disrupted the interaction with SRCs and abolished RORgammat-mediated trans-activation but not its ability to inhibit transcription. Transgenes encoding the wild-type RORgammat, but not the mutant, restored thymocyte survival in RORgamma null mice. Our results thus clearly demonstrate that RORgammat recruits SRCs to impose a gene expression pattern required to expand the life span of thymocytes in vivo, which increases the opportunities for assembling a functional TCR.Kelch-like 10 (KLHL10) is a member of the BTB (Bric-a-brac, Tramtrack, and Broad-Complex)-kelch protein superfamily essential for spermiogenesis and male fertility. In a search for KLHL10-interacting proteins using a yeast two-hybrid assay, we identified Cullin3 (CUL3) as one of multiple KLHL10-interacting partners. Yeast cotransformation assays revealed that CUL3 bound the BTB/POZ domain of KLHL10. Northern blot and quantitative RT-PCR analyses demonstrated that Cul3 mRNA was preferentially expressed in the testis. In situ hybridization analysis localized Cul3 mRNA to spermatids in the adult testis. CUL3 protein was detected in elongating and elongated spermatids (steps 10-16) by immunofluorescent microscopy. The expression pattern of CUL3 resembles KLHL10. CUL3 was coimmunoprecipated with KLHL10, and KLHL10 was also detected in the CUL3 immunoprecipitants using testis lysates. These findings suggest that KLHL10, like other BTB/kelch proteins, interacts with CUL3 to form a CUL3-based ubiquitin E3 ligase that functions specifically in the testis to mediate protein ubiquitination during spermiogenesis.LIS1 is mutated in the human neuronal migration defect lissencephaly and along with NDEL1 (formerly NUDEL) participates in the regulation of cytoplasmic dynein function during neuronal development. Targeted disruption of Ndel1 suggested that NDEL1 could have other molecular targets that regulate microtubule organization for proper neuronal migration. To further understanding the molecular mechanism of LIS1 and lissencephaly, we identified the katanin p60 microtubule-severing protein as an additional molecular target of NDEL1. We demonstrate that phosphorylation of NDEL1 by Cdk5 facilitates interaction between NDEL1 and p60, suggesting that P-NDEL1 regulates the distribution of katanin p60. Abnormal accumulation of p60 in nucleus of Ndel1 null mutants supports an essential role of NDEL1 in p60 regulation. Complete loss of NDEL1 or expression of dominant negative mutants of p60 in migrating neurons results in defective migration and elongation of nuclear-centrosomal distance. Our results suggest that NDEL1 is essential for mitotic cell division and neuronal migration not only via regulation of cytoplasmic dynein function but also by modulation of katanin p60 localization and function.The presence of a conserved protein motif usually implies common functional features. Here, we focused on the LisH (LIS1 homology) domain, which is found in multiple proteins, and have focused on three involved in human genetic diseases; LIS1, Transducin beta-like 1X (TBL1) and Oral-facial-digital type 1 (OFD1). The recently solved structure of the LisH domain in the N-terminal region of LIS1 depicted it as a novel dimerization motif. Our findings indicated that the LisH domain of both LIS1 and TBL1 is essential for in vitro oligomerization. Furthermore, our study disclosed novel in vivo features of the LisH motif. Mutations in conserved LisH amino acids significantly reduced both the protein half-life of LIS1, TBL1, and OFD1, and dramatically affected specific intracellular localizations of these proteins. LIS1 mutated in the LisH domain induced its localization to the actin filaments. TBL1 mutated in the LisH domain was not imported into the nucleus. Mutations in OFD1 modified its localization to the Golgi apparatus and in some cases also to the nucleus. In summary, the LisH domain may participate in protein dimerization, affect protein half-life, and may influence specific cellular localizations. Our results allow the prediction that mutations within the LisH motif are likely to result in pathogenic consequences in genes associated with genetic diseases.We reported previously that phospholipase C (PLC) delta4 is required for calcium mobilization in the zona pellucida-induced acrosome reaction in sperm. Here we focused on the function of the C2 domain of PLCdelta4 and report that glutamate receptor-interacting protein1 (GRIP1) was identified as a binding protein of the PLCdelta4-C2 domain on yeast two-hybrid screening. Physiological interaction of GRIP1 with PLCdelta4 in mouse testis was confirmed by immunoprecipitation with anti-PLCdelta4 antibodies and the association seemed to correlate with the maturation stage of sperm. We also determined that a PDZ-binding motif at the C-terminus of the PLCdelta4-C2 domain is responsible for GRIP1 binding, whereas the sixth or seventh PDZ domain of GRIP1 is essential and sufficient for association with the PLCdelta4-C2 domain. These results indicate that PLCdelta4 binds via its C2 domain to the PDZ6 or PDZ7 domain of GRIP1, and that this association may play a role in spermatogenesis.Activation of Wnt/beta-catenin target genes is regulated by a heterodimer of beta-catenin and the high mobility group box transcription factors of the lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF)/T-cell factor (TCF) family. In vertebrates, four LEF/TCF family members have been identified. They all contain a conserved beta-catenin-binding motif at the N terminus and a highly conserved high mobility group box for DNA binding. The core sequence between these motifs is less conserved and contributes to the specific properties of the individual family members. To identify interacting proteins that allocate specific functions to the individual LEF/TCF transcription factors, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen using the less conserved core sequence as bait. We isolated the murine LIM protein HIC-5 (hydrogen peroxide-induced clone 5; also termed ARA-55 (androgen receptor activator of 55 kDa)) and cloned the highly conserved Xenopus homolog. In addition, we report that the LIM domain-containing C-terminal half of HIC-5 binds to a conserved alternatively spliced exon in LEF/TCF transcription factors. Our functional analyses revealed that HIC-5 acts as negative regulator of a subset of LEF/TCF family members, which have been characterized as activators in reporter gene analyses and in the Xenopus axis induction assay. In addition, we observed a repressive interference of LEF/TCF family members with HIC-5-mediated activation of glucocorticoid-driven transcription, which again could be allocated to specific LEF/TCF subtypes. With the characterization of HIC-5 as a binding partner of the alternatively spliced exon in LEF/TCF transcription factors, we identified a novel molecular mechanism in the dialog of steroid and canonical Wnt signaling that is LEF/TCF subtype-dependent.The centrosome is the major microtubule-organizing center in animal cells. Although the cytoplasmic dynein regulator Nudel interacts with centrosomes, its role herein remains unclear. Here, we show that in Cos7 cells Nudel is a mother centriole protein with rapid turnover independent of dynein activity. During centriole duplication, Nudel targets to the new mother centriole later than ninein but earlier than dynactin. Its centrosome localization requires a C-terminal region that is essential for associations with dynein, dynactin, pericentriolar material (PCM)-1, pericentrin, and gamma-tubulin. Overexpression of a mutant Nudel lacking this region, a treatment previously shown to inactivate dynein, dislocates centrosomal Lis1, dynactin, and PCM-1, with little influence on pericentrin and gamma-tubulin in Cos7 and HeLa cells. Silencing Nudel in HeLa cells markedly decreases centrosomal targeting of all the aforementioned proteins. Silencing Nudel also represses centrosomal MT nucleation and anchoring. Furthermore, Nudel can interact with pericentrin independently of dynein. Our current results suggest that Nudel plays a role in both dynein-mediated centripetal transport of dynactin, Lis1, and PCM-1 as well as in dynein-independent centrosomal targeting of pericentrin and gamma-tubulin. Moreover, Nudel seems to tether dynactin and dynein to the mother centriole for MT anchoring.Lis1 gene defects impair neuronal migration, causing the severe human brain malformation lissencephaly. Although much is known about its interactions with microtubules, microtubule-binding proteins such as CLIP-170, and with the dynein motor complex, the response of Lis1 to neuronal motility signals has not been elucidated. Lis1 deficiency is associated with deregulation of the Rho-family GTPases Cdc42, Rac1 and RhoA, and ensuing actin cytoskeletal defects, but the link between Lis1 and Rho GTPases remains unclear. We report here that calcium influx enhances neuronal motility through Lis1-dependent regulation of Rho GTPases. Lis1 promotes Cdc42 activation through interaction with the calcium sensitive GTPase scaffolding protein IQGAP1, maintaining the perimembrane localization of IQGAP1 and CLIP170 and thereby tethering microtubule ends to the cortical actin cytoskeleton. Lis1 thus is a key component of neuronal motility signal transduction that regulates the cytoskeleton by complexing with IQGAP1, active Cdc42 and CLIP-170 upon calcium influx.The four mammalian SPRY domain-containing SOCS box proteins (SSB-1 to SSB-4) are characterized by a C-terminal SOCS box and a central SPRY domain. We have determined the first SPRY-domain structure, as part of SSB-2, by NMR. This domain adopts a novel fold consisting of a beta-sandwich structure formed by two four-stranded antiparallel beta-sheets with a unique topology. We demonstrate that SSB-1, SSB-2 and SSB-4, but not SSB-3, bind prostate apoptosis response protein-4 (Par-4). Mutational analysis of SSB-2 loop regions identified conserved structural determinants for its interaction with Par-4 and the hepatocyte growth factor receptor, c-Met. Mutations in analogous loop regions of pyrin and midline-1 SPRY domains have been shown to cause Mediterranean fever and Opitz syndrome, respectively. Our findings provide a template for SPRY-domain structure and an insight into the mechanism of SPRY-protein interaction.In the mammalian central nervous system, the structure known as the postsynaptic density (PSD) is a dense complex of proteins whose function is to detect and respond to neurotransmitter released from presynaptic axon terminals. Regulation of protein phosphorylation in this molecular machinery is critical to the activity of its components, which include neurotransmitter receptors, kinases/phosphatases, scaffolding molecules, and proteins regulating cytoskeletal structure. To characterize the phosphorylation state of proteins in PSD samples, we combined strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography with IMAC. Initially, tryptic peptides were separated by cation exchange and analyzed by reverse phase chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry, which led to the identification of phosphopeptides in most SCX fractions. Because each of these individual fractions was too complex to characterize completely in single LC-MS/MS runs, we enriched for phosphopeptides by performing IMAC on each SCX fraction, yielding at least a 3-fold increase in identified phosphopeptides relative to either approach alone (SCX or IMAC). This enabled us to identify at least one site of phosphorylation on 23% (287 of 1,264) of all proteins found to be present in the postsynaptic density preparation. In total, we identified 998 unique phosphorylated peptides, mapping to 723 unique sites of phosphorylation. At least one exact site of phosphorylation was determined on 62% (621 of 998) of all phosphopeptides, and approximately 80% of identified phosphorylation sites are novel.Mutations in Lis1 cause classical lissencephaly, a developmental brain abnormality characterized by defects in neuronal positioning. Over the last decade, a clear link has been forged between Lis1 and the microtubule motor cytoplasmic dynein. Substantial evidence indicates that Lis1 functions in a highly conserved pathway with dynein to regulate neuronal migration and other motile events. Yeast two-hybrid studies predict that Lis1 binds directly to dynein heavy chains (Sasaki et al., 2000; Tai et al., 2002), but the mechanistic significance of this interaction is not well understood. We now report that recombinant Lis1 binds to native brain dynein and significantly increases the microtubule-stimulated enzymatic activity of dynein in vitro. Lis1 does this without increasing the proportion of dynein that binds to microtubules, indicating that Lis1 influences enzymatic activity rather than microtubule association. Dynein stimulation in vitro is not a generic feature of microtubule-associated proteins, because tau did not stimulate dynein. To our knowledge, this is the first indication that Lis1 or any other factor directly modulates the enzymatic activity of cytoplasmic dynein. Lis1 must be able to homodimerize to stimulate dynein, because a C-terminal fragment (containing the dynein interaction site but missing the self-association domain) was unable to stimulate dynein. Binding and colocalization studies indicate that Lis1 does not interact with all dynein complexes found in the brain. We propose a model in which Lis1 stimulates the activity of a subset of motors, which could be particularly important during neuronal migration and long-distance axonal transport.Protein transport plays a critical role in the interaction of the cell with its environment. Recent studies have identified TSC1 and TSC2, two tumor suppressor genes involved in tuberous sclerosis complex, as regulators of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway. Cells deficient in TSC1 or TSC2 possess high levels of Rheb-GTP resulting in constitutive mTOR activation. We have shown previously that the TSC1/TSC2 complex is involved in post-Golgi transport of VSVG and caveolin-1 in mammalian cells. Here, we show that modulation of mTOR activity affects caveolin-1 localization and that this effect is independent of p70S6K. Tsc1- and Tsc2-null cells exhibit abnormal caveolin-1 localization that is accompanied by disorganized microtubules in the subcortical region. Analyses of green fluorescent protein-EB1 and tubulin in live mutant cells suggest a failure of the plus-ends to sense cortical signals and to halt microtubule growth. Down-regulation of CLIP-170, a putative mTOR substrate with microtubule-binding properties, rescued the abnormal microtubule arrangement and caveolin-1 localization in Tsc2-/- cells. Together, these findings highlight a novel role of the TSC2/mTOR pathway in regulating microtubule-dependent protein transport.Here, we report a new serine/threonine protein kinase of the SNF1 subfamily Omphk1. Two Omphk homologues exist in each vertebrate species, and one homologue exists in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans; the kinase domain is highly conserved among these homologues, and several domains are conserved among vertebrate Omphk. Omphk1 expression dynamically changes in the developing central nervous system, is found ubiquitously in epidermis, and is present uniquely in several other tissues. Its expression is also found in each tissue associated with the ventral body wall closure: the primary body wall composed of primitive ectoderm and each component of the secondary body wall. Concomitantly, its null mutant exhibits omphalocele with a failure in closure of the secondary body wall. There are no apparent gross morphological defects in brain, however, despite the unique Omphk1 expression in this tissue.Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptors (FGFRs) regulate a multitude of cellular processes during embryogenesis and in the adult. The extracellular part of the prototypical FGFR consists of three Ig modules (Ig1 - Ig3), in which Ig2 and Ig3 determine affinity and specificity for FGF and heparin, while the Ig1 module is thought to have a regulatory function. The crystal structures of the Ig2 and Ig3 modules alone and in complex with FGF have previously been reported. The structure of the Ig1 module is unknown, and very little is known about the structural determinants for the regulatory function of this module. We describe here the NMR structure of the Ig1 module of mouse FGFR1. The three-dimensional fold of the module belongs to the intermediate Ig subgroup and can be described as a beta-barrel consisting of two beta-sheets. One sheet is formed by A\', G, F, C, and C\', and the other by A, B, B\', E, and D beta-strands. The overall strand topology of the Ig1 module is similar to that of the Ig2 and Ig3 modules. However, the A/A\' loop of the Ig1 module is much longer than that of the Ig2 and Ig3 modules. It contains eight extra residues compared to the Ig3 module, and five extra residues compared to Ig2.Bright/ARID3a/Dril1, a member of the ARID family of transcription factors, is expressed in a highly regulated fashion in B lymphocytes, where it enhances immunoglobulin transcription three- to sixfold. Recent publications from our lab indicated that functional, but not kinase-inactive, Bruton\'s tyrosine kinase (Btk) is critical for Bright activity in an in vitro model system, yet Bright itself is not appreciably tyrosine phosphorylated. These data suggested that a third protein, and Btk substrate, must contribute to Bright-enhanced immunoglobulin transcription. The ubiquitously expressed transcription factor TFII-I was identified as a substrate for Btk several years ago. In this work, we show that TFII-I directly interacts with human Bright through amino acids in Bright\'s protein interaction domain and that specific tyrosine residues of TFII-I are essential for Bright-induced activity of an immunoglobulin reporter gene. Moreover, inhibition of TFII-I function in a B-cell line resulted in decreased heavy-chain transcript levels. These data suggest that Bright functions as a three-component protein complex in the immunoglobulin locus and tie together previous data indicating important roles for Btk and TFII-I in B lymphocytes.The prevalence and mechanistic significance of self-association among substrate adaptors for the Cul-Rbx family of ubiquitin ligases remain unclear. We now report that it is as a homodimer that the substrate adaptor Keap1 interacts with Cul3. The resulting complex facilitates ubiquitylation of the Nrf2 transcription factor but only when this substrate possesses within its Neh2 domain a second cryptic Keap1-binding site, the DLG motif, in addition to its previously described ETGE site. Both motifs recognize overlapping surfaces on Keap1, and the seven lysine residues of Nrf2 that act as ubiquitin acceptors lie between them. Based on these data, we propose a "fixed-ends" model for Nrf2 ubiquitylation in which each binding site becomes tethered to a separate subunit of the Keap1 homodimer. This two-site interaction between Keap1 and Nrf2 constrains the mobility of the target lysine residues in the Neh2 domain, increasing their average concentration in the vicinity of the Rbx-bound ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, and thus the rate at which the transcription factor is ubiquitylated. We show that self-association is a general feature of Cul3 substrate adaptors and propose that the fixed-ends mechanism is commonly utilized to recruit, orientate, and ubiquitylate substrates upon this family of ubiquitin ligases.ErbB-4 is cleaved by alpha- and gamma-secretases to release a soluble 80-kDa intracellular domain, termed s80, which translocates to the nucleus. s80 is present in the nucleus of normal and cancerous mammary cells and is predicted to have a role in cell differentiation. To further investigate the mechanism by which s80 may mediate differentiation, we tested whether s80 regulates Eto2, a transcriptional corepressor that is involved in erythrocyte differentiation and is also implicated in human breast cancer. Here we show that ligand binding to ErbB-4 causes s80 translocation to the nucleus, where it colocalizes and interacts with Eto2. Expression of s80 blocks Eto2-mediated transcriptional repression of a heterologous promoter. This effect on Eto2 does not require s80 kinase activity and is mediated by the carboxyl-terminal region of s80. Although other cell surface receptors regulate transcription by activating signal transduction cascades, these data present a novel mechanism of corepressor regulation and suggest a role for Eto2 in ErbB-4-dependent differentiation.Myocardin is a cardiac- and smooth muscle-specific SAP domain transcription factor that functions as a coactivator for serum response factor (SRF), which controls genes involved in muscle differentiation and cell proliferation. The DNA binding domain of SRF, which interacts with myocardin, shares homology with the MEF2 transcription factor, which also controls muscle and growth-associated genes. Here we show that alternative splicing produces a cardiac-enriched isoform of myocardin containing a unique peptide sequence that confers the ability to interact with and stimulate the transcriptional activity of MEF2. This MEF2 binding motif is also contained in a previously unknown SAP domain transcription factor, referred to as MASTR, which functions as a MEF2 coactivator. This unique protein-protein interaction motif expands the regulatory potential of myocardin, and its presence in MASTR reveals a new mechanism for the control of MEF2 activity.Leucine-rich repeat and fibronectin III domain-containing (Lrfn) has five members in mouse and human (Lrfn1, Lrfn2, Lrfn3, Lrfn4, Lrfn5), and homologues in other vertebrates. Lrfn proteins share leucine-rich repeat (LRR)-immunoglobulin-like (Ig)-fibronectin type III (Fn)-transmembrane domain structure, which is also found in LRR-Ig-Fn superfamily proteins. Mouse Lrfn genes were expressed at adult stage predominantly in the brain. In the course of development, expression of Lrfn1, Lrfn3, and Lrfn4 started from immature neural cells, whereas that of Lrfn2 and Lrfn5 was limited to mature ones. Lrfn1-5 commonly encode glycoproteins spanning the plasma membrane, with their N-terminus located on the extracellular side. C-termini of Lrfn1, Lrfn2 and Lrfn4 were bound by PDZ domains of postsynaptic protein PSD95, re-distributing PSD95 to cell periphery where the Lrfn proteins were detected. These results suggest that Lrfn proteins are neuronal components with a role in the developing or mature vertebrate nervous system.Differentiation of mammary epithelium in vivo requires signaling through prolactin- and ErbB4/HER4-dependent mechanisms; how these pathways intersect is unknown. We show herein that HC11 mouse mammary cells undergo ErbB4-dependent lactational differentiation. Prolactin and the ErbB4 ligand HB-EGF each induced STAT5A activation, expression of lactogenic differentiation markers, and lumen formation in three-dimensional Matrigel cultures in HC11 cells. ErbB4 undergoes ligand-dependent transmembrane domain cleavage at Val-675, releasing a soluble 80-kDa intracellular domain (s80(HER4)) that localizes to nuclei; the physiological relevance of s80(HER4) is unknown. A HER4(V675A) mutant abolishing transmembrane cleavage impaired STAT5A activity, lactogenic gene expression, and lumen formation. Kinase-dead HER4(KD) was neither cleaved nor able to induce differentiation of HC11 cells. Without treating HC11 cells with prolactin or HB-EGF, s80(HER4) (expressed from a cDNA construct) localized to the nucleus, activated STAT5A, and induced three-dimensional lumen formation. Nuclear localization of exogenous s80(HER4) required intact kinase activity of s80(HER4), as did activation of STAT5A. In contrast, nuclear localization of s80(HER4) and STAT5A activation did not require the 16-amino acid region of the ErbB4 intracellular domain specific to the Cyt-1 isoform of ErbB4, and absent in the Cyt-2 isoform. These results suggest that s80(HER4) formation contributes to ErbB4-dependent differentiation of mammary epithelial cells.Within the mammalian genome, there are many multimember gene families that encode membrane proteins with extracellular leucine rich repeats which are thought to act as cell adhesion or signalling molecules. We previously showed that the members of the NLRR gene family are expressed in a developmentally restricted manner in the mouse with NLRR-1 being expressed in the developing myotome. The FLRT gene family shows a similar genomic layout and predicted protein secondary structure to the NLRRs so we analysed expression of the three FLRT genes during mouse development. FLRTs are glycosylated membrane proteins expressed at the cell surface which localise in a homophilic manner to cell-cell contacts expressing the focal adhesion marker vinculin. Each member of the FLRT family has a distinct, highly regulated expression pattern, as was seen for the NLRR family. FLRT3 has a provocative expression pattern during somite development being expressed in regions of the somite where muscle precursor cells migrate from the dermomyotome and move into the myotome, and later in myotomal precursors destined to migrate towards their final destination, for example, those that form the ventral body wall. FLRT3 is also expressed at the midbrain/hindbrain boundary and in the apical ectodermal ridge, regions where FGF signalling is known to be important, suggesting that the role for FLRT3 in FGF signalling identified in Xenopus is conserved in mammals. FLRT1 is expressed at brain compartmental boundaries and FLRT2 is expressed in a subset of the sclerotome, adjacent to the region that forms the syndetome, suggesting that interaction with FGF signalling may be a general property of FLRT proteins. We confirmed this by showing that all FLRTs can interact with FGFR1 and FLRTs can be induced by the activation of FGF signalling by FGF-2. We conclude that FLRT proteins act as regulators of FGF signalling, being induced by the signal and then able to interact with the signalling receptor, in many tissues during mouse embryogenesis. This process may, in part, be dependent on homophilic intercellular interactions between FLRT molecules.FilaminC (FLNc) is the muscle-specific member of a family of actin binding proteins. Although it interacts with many proteins involved in muscular dystrophies, its unique role in muscle is poorly understood. To address this, two models were developed. First, FLNc expression was stably reduced in C2C12 myoblasts by RNA interference. While these cells start differentiation normally, they display defects in differentiation and fusion ability and ultimately form multinucleated "myoballs" rather than maintain elongated morphology. Second, a mouse model carrying a deletion of last 8 exons of Flnc was developed. FLNc-deficient mice die shortly after birth, due to respiratory failure, and have severely reduced birth weights, with fewer muscle fibers and primary myotubes, indicating defects in primary myogenesis. They exhibit variation in fiber size, fibers with centrally located nuclei, and some rounded fibers resembling the in vitro phenotype. The similarity of the phenotype of FLNc-deficient mice to the filamin-interacting TRIO null mice was further confirmed by comparing FLNc-deficient C2C12 cells to TRIO-deficient cells. These data provide the first evidence that FLNc has a crucial role in muscle development and maintenance of muscle structural integrity and suggest the presence of a TRIO-FLNc-dependent pathway in maintaining proper myotube structure.Chromatin insulators are boundary elements between distinctly regulated, neighboring chromosomal domains, and they function by blocking the effects of nearby enhancers in a position-dependent manner. Here, we show that the SNF2-like chromodomain helicase protein CHD8 interacts with the insulator binding protein CTCF. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that CHD8 was present at known CTCF target sites, such as the differentially methylated region (DMR) of H19, the locus control region of beta-globin, and the promoter region of BRCA1 and c-myc genes. RNA interference-mediated knockdown of CHD8 significantly abolished the H19 DMR insulator activity that depends highly on CTCF, leading to reactivation of imprinted IGF2 from chromosome of maternal origin. Further, the lack of CHD8 affected CpG methylation and histone acetylation around the CTCF binding sites, adjacent to heterochromatin, of BRCA1 and c-myc genes. These findings provide insight into the role of CTCF-CHD8 complex in insulation and epigenetic regulation at active insulator sites.Synaptic cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) regulate synapse formation through their trans-synaptic and heterophilic adhesion. Here we show that postsynaptic netrin-G ligand (NGL) CAMs associate with netrin-G CAMs in an isoform-specific manner and, through their cytosolic tail, with the abundant postsynaptic scaffold postsynaptic density-95 (PSD-95). Overexpression of NGL-2 in cultured rat neurons increased the number of PSD-95-positive dendritic protrusions. NGL-2 located on heterologous cells or beads induced functional presynaptic differentiation in contacting neurites. Direct aggregation of NGL-2 on the surface membrane of dendrites induced the clustering of excitatory postsynaptic proteins. Competitive inhibition by soluble NGL-2 reduced the number of excitatory synapses. NGL-2 knockdown reduced excitatory, but not inhibitory, synapse numbers and currents. These results suggest that NGL regulates the formation of excitatory synapses.FGF23 is a unique member of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family because it acts as a hormone that derives from bone and regulates kidney functions, whereas most other family members are thought to regulate various cell functions at a local level. The renotropic activity of circulating FGF23 indicates the possible presence of an FGF23-specific receptor in the kidney. Here we show that a previously undescribed receptor conversion by Klotho, a senescence-related molecule, generates the FGF23 receptor. Using a renal homogenate, we found that Klotho binds to FGF23. Forced expression of Klotho enabled the high-affinity binding of FGF23 to the cell surface and restored the ability of a renal cell line to respond to FGF23 treatment. Moreover, FGF23 incompetence was induced by injecting wild-type mice with an anti-Klotho monoclonal antibody. Thus, Klotho is essential for endogenous FGF23 function. Because Klotho alone seemed to be incapable of intracellular signalling, we searched for other components of the FGF23 receptor and found FGFR1(IIIc), which was directly converted by Klotho into the FGF23 receptor. Thus, the concerted action of Klotho and FGFR1(IIIc) reconstitutes the FGF23 receptor. These findings provide insights into the diversity and specificity of interactions between FGF and FGF receptors.Protein phosphorylation is a complex network of signaling and regulatory events that affects virtually every cellular process. Our understanding of the nature of this network as a whole remains limited, largely because of an array of technical challenges in the isolation and high-throughput sequencing of phosphorylated species. In the present work, we demonstrate that a combination of tandem phosphopeptide enrichment methods, high performance MS, and optimized database search/data filtering strategies is a powerful tool for surveying the phosphoproteome. Using our integrated analytical platform, we report the identification of 5,635 nonredundant phosphorylation sites from 2,328 proteins from mouse liver. From this list of sites, we extracted both novel and known motifs for specific Ser/Thr kinases including a "dipolar" motif. We also found that C-terminal phosphorylation was more frequent than at any other location and that the distribution of potential kinases for these sites was unique. Finally, we identified double phosphorylation motifs that may be involved in ordered phosphorylation.Most specific and general transcription factors (TFs) become dissociated from hypoacetylated mitotic chromosomes, which may contribute to transcriptional silencing during mitosis. Only some chromosomal proteins, such as bromodomain containing protein 4 (BRD4), have a potential to associate with mitotic chromosomes in a histone acetylation-dependent manner. It remains to be fully demonstrated whether similar displacement of nuclear factors takes place in meiotic oocytes whose chromosomes become globally deacetylated. To address this, we here examined the subcellular localization of BRD4 in conjunction with the acetylation status of histones in mouse oocytes. Immunofluorescence studies revealed that BRD4 preferentially localized to mitotic chromosomes in early embryos. In contrast, not only endogenous BRD4 but also exogenous BRD4 overexpressed by mRNA microinjection were displaced from meiotic chromosomes whose histones H3 and H4 were deacetylated. Treatment with trichostatin A (TSA), an inhibitor of histone deacetylases, induced histone hyperacetylation of meiotic chromosomes from which endogenous BRD4, however, remained dissociated. Finally, meiotic chromosomal localization of BRD4 could be achieved by BRD4 overexpression together with TSA-induced histone hyperacetylation. These results indicate that, unlike mitosis, histone acetylation is necessary but not sufficient for chromosomal localization of BRD4 during meiosis, suggesting that meiotic oocytes may have additional mechanism(s) for displacement of chromosomal proteins and TFs.Reelin is an extracellular protein that directs the organization of cortical structures of the brain through the activation of two receptors, the very low-density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR) and the apolipoprotein E receptor 2 (ApoER2), and the phosphorylation of Disabled-1 (Dab1). Lis1, the product of the Pafah1b1 gene, is a component of the brain platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase 1b (Pafah1b) complex, and binds to phosphorylated Dab1 in response to Reelin. Here we investigated the involvement of the whole Pafah1b complex in Reelin signaling and cortical layer formation and found that catalytic subunits of the Pafah1b complex, Pafah1b2 and Pafah1b3, specifically bind to the NPxYL sequence of VLDLR, but not to ApoER2. Compound Pafah1b1(+/-);Apoer2(-/-) mutant mice exhibit a reeler-like phenotype in the forebrain consisting of the inversion of cortical layers and hippocampal disorganization, whereas double Pafah1b1(+/-);Vldlr(-/-) mutants do not. These results suggest that a cross-talk between the Pafah1b complex and Reelin occurs downstream of the VLDLR receptor.Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) is a liver-derived endocrine factor that stimulates glucose uptake in adipocytes. Here, we show that FGF21 activity depends on betaKlotho, a single-pass transmembrane protein whose expression is induced during differentiation from preadipocytes to adipocytes. BetaKlotho physically interacts with FGF receptors 1c and 4, thereby increasing the ability of these FGF receptors to bind FGF21 and activate the MAP kinase cascade. Knockdown of betaKlotho expression by siRNA in adipocytes diminishes glucose uptake induced by FGF21. Importantly, administration of FGF21 into mice induces MAP kinase phosphorylation in white adipose tissue and not in tissues without betaKlotho expression. Thus, betaKlotho functions as a cofactor essential for FGF21 activity.Cellular responses to DNA damage are mediated by a number of protein kinases, including ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) and ATR (ATM and Rad3-related). The outlines of the signal transduction portion of this pathway are known, but little is known about the physiological scope of the DNA damage response (DDR). We performed a large-scale proteomic analysis of proteins phosphorylated in response to DNA damage on consensus sites recognized by ATM and ATR and identified more than 900 regulated phosphorylation sites encompassing over 700 proteins. Functional analysis of a subset of this data set indicated that this list is highly enriched for proteins involved in the DDR. This set of proteins is highly interconnected, and we identified a large number of protein modules and networks not previously linked to the DDR. This database paints a much broader landscape for the DDR than was previously appreciated and opens new avenues of investigation into the responses to DNA damage in mammals.Autophagy is a self-degradative process involved both in basal turnover of cellular components and in response to nutrient starvation or organelle damage in a wide range of eukaryotes. During autophagy, portions of the cytoplasm are sequestered by double-membraned vesicles called autophagosomes, and are degraded after fusion with lysosomes for subsequent recycling. In vertebrates, this process acts as a pro-survival or pro-death mechanism in different physiological and pathological conditions, such as neurodegeneration and cancer; however, the roles of autophagy during embryonic development are still largely uncharacterized. Beclin1 (Becn1; coiled-coil, myosin-like BCL2-interacting protein) is a principal regulator in autophagosome formation, and its deficiency results in early embryonic lethality. Here we show that Ambra1 (activating molecule in Beclin1-regulated autophagy), a large, previously unknown protein bearing a WD40 domain at its amino terminus, regulates autophagy and has a crucial role in embryogenesis. We found that Ambra1 is a positive regulator of the Becn1-dependent programme of autophagy, as revealed by its overexpression and by RNA interference experiments in vitro. Notably, Ambra1 functional deficiency in mouse embryos leads to severe neural tube defects associated with autophagy impairment, accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins, unbalanced cell proliferation and excessive apoptotic cell death. In addition to identifying a new and essential element regulating the autophagy programme, our results provide in vivo evidence supporting the existence of a complex interplay between autophagy, cell growth and cell death required for neural development in mammals.Friedreich ataxia, the most common recessive ataxia, is caused by the deficiency of the mitochondrial protein frataxin (Fxn), an iron chaperone involved in the assembly of Fe-S clusters (ISC). In yeast, mitochondria play a central role for all Fe-S proteins, independently of their subcellular localization. In mammalian cells, this central role of mitochondria remains controversial as an independent cytosolic ISC assembly machinery has been suggested. In the present work, we show that three extramitochondrial Fe-S proteins (xanthine oxido-reductase, glutamine phosphoribosylpyrophosphate amidotransferase and Nth1) are affected in Fxn-deleted mouse tissues. Furthermore, we show that Fxn is strictly localized to the mitochondria, excluding the presence of a cytosolic pool of Fxn in normal adult tissues. Together, these results demonstrate that in mammals, Fxn and mitochondria play a cardinal role in the maturation of extramitochondrial Fe-S proteins. The Fe-S scaffold protein IscU progressively decreases in Fxn-deleted tissues, further contributing to the impairment of Fe-S proteins. These results thus provide new cellular pathways that may contribute to molecular mechanisms of the disease.The general transcription factor TFII-I, with the corresponding gene name GTF2I, is an unusual transcriptional regulator that associates with both basal and signal-induced transcription factors. TFII-I consists of six GTF2I repeat domains, called I-repeats R1-R6. The structure and function of the GTF2I domain are not clearly understood, even though it contains a helix-loop-helix motif, which is considered to be the protein-protein interaction area, based on biochemical analyses. Here, we report the solution structure of the fifth repeat of the six GTF2I repeat domains from murine TFII-I, which was determined by heteronuclear multidimensional NMR spectroscopy (PDB code 1Q60). The three-dimensional structure of the GTF2I domain is classified as a new fold, consisting of four helices (residues 8-24, 34-39, 63-71, and 83-91), two antiparallel beta strands (residues 44-47 and 77-80), and a well-defined loop containing two beta-turns between sheet 1 and helix 3. All of the repeats probably have similar folds to that of repeat 5, because the conserved residues in the GTF2I repeat domains are assembled on the hydrophobic core, turns, and secondary structure elements, as revealed by a comparison of the sequences of the first through the sixth GTF2I repeats in TFII-I.The SLTM [SAF (scaffold attachment factor)-like transcription modulator] protein contains a SAF-box DNA-binding motif and an RNA-binding domain, and shares an overall identity of 34% with SAFB1 {scaffold attachment factor-B1; also known as SAF-B (scaffold attachment factor B), HET [heat-shock protein 27 ERE (oestrogen response element) and TATA-box-binding protein] or HAP (heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1-interacting protein)}. Here, we show that SLTM is localized to the cell nucleus, but excluded from nucleoli, and to a large extent it co-localizes with SAFB1. In the nucleus, SLTM has a punctate distribution and it does not co-localize with SR (serine/arginine) proteins. Overexpression of SAFB1 has been shown to exert a number of inhibitory effects, including suppression of oestrogen signalling. Although SLTM also suppressed the ability of oestrogen to activate a reporter gene in MCF-7 breast-cancer cells, inhibition of a constitutively active beta-galactosidase gene suggested that this was primarily the consequence of a generalized inhibitory effect on transcription. Measurement of RNA synthesis, which showed a particularly marked inhibition of [(3)H]uridine incorporation into mRNA, supported this conclusion. In addition, analysis of cell-cycle parameters, chromatin condensation and cytochrome c release showed that SLTM induced apoptosis in a range of cultured cell lines. Thus the inhibitory effects of SLTM on gene expression appear to result from generalized down-regulation of mRNA synthesis and initiation of apoptosis consequent upon overexpressing the protein. While indicating a crucial role for SLTM in cellular function, these results also emphasize the need for caution when interpreting phenotypic changes associated with manipulation of protein expression levels.Mammalian neural stem cells (NSCs) have the capacity to both self-renew and to generate all the neuronal and glial cell-types of the adult nervous system. Global chromatin changes accompany the transition from proliferating NSCs to committed neuronal lineages, but the mechanisms involved have been unclear. Using a proteomics approach, we show that a switch in subunit composition of neural, ATP-dependent SWI/SNF-like chromatin remodeling complexes accompanies this developmental transition. Proliferating neural stem and progenitor cells express complexes in which BAF45a, a Kruppel/PHD domain protein and the actin-related protein BAF53a are quantitatively associated with the SWI2/SNF2-like ATPases, Brg and Brm. As neural progenitors exit the cell cycle, these subunits are replaced by the homologous BAF45b, BAF45c, and BAF53b. BAF45a/53a subunits are necessary and sufficient for neural progenitor proliferation. Preventing the subunit switch impairs neuronal differentiation, indicating that this molecular event is essential for the transition from neural stem/progenitors to postmitotic neurons. More broadly, these studies suggest that SWI/SNF-like complexes in vertebrates achieve biological specificity by combinatorial assembly of their subunits.Craniofacial development is a complex multi-step process leading to the morphogenesis of the face and sense organs, and to that of the neck, including the anteriormost part of the respiratory and digestive apparatus and associated endocrine glands. In vertebrates, the process is initiated by the formation of the pharyngeal arches from ectoderm, endoderm and mesoderm. These arches are then populated by neural crest cells, which originate from the central nervous system. We show here that, in mouse, there is a requirement for the HMG box factor SOX3 during the earliest stage of pharyngeal development: the formation of the pharyngeal pouches that segment the pharyngeal region by individualising each arch. In Sox3-null mutants, these pouches are expanded at the detriment of the second pharyngeal arch. As a consequence, neural crest cell migration and ectoderm-derived epibranchial placode development are affected, leading to craniofacial defects. We also show that Sox3 genetically interacts both with FgfR1 and with Sox2, another member of the Soxb1 family, to fulfil its function in the pharyngeal region. Although the importance of the neural crest has long been recognised, our studies highlight the equally crucial role of the pharyngeal region in craniofacial morphogenesis. They also give insight into the formation of pharyngeal pouches, of which little is known in vertebrates. Finally, this work introduces two new players in craniofacial development - SOX3 and SOX2.Metazoans employ reversible tyrosine phosphorylation to regulate innumerable biological processes. Thus, the large-scale identification of tyrosine phosphorylation sites from primary tissues is an essential step toward a molecular systems understanding of dynamic regulation in vivo. The relative paucity of phosphotyrosine has greatly limited its identification in large-scale phosphoproteomic experiments. However, using antiphosphotyrosine peptide immunoprecipitations, we report the largest study to date of tyrosine phosphorylation sites from primary tissue, identifying 414 unique tyrosine phosphorylation sites from murine brain. To measure the conservation of phosphorylated tyrosines and their surrounding residues, we constructed a computational pipeline and identified patterns of conservation within the signature of phosphotyrosine.Myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) proteins play a key role in promoting the expression of muscle-specific genes in differentiated muscle cells. MEF2 activity is regulated by the association with several transcriptional co-factors and by post-translational modifications. In the present report, we provide evidence for a novel regulatory mechanism of MEF2C activity, which occurs at the onset of skeletal muscle differentiation and is based on Lys4 acetylation. This covalent modification results in the enhancement of MEF2C binding to DNA and chromatin. In particular, we report that the kinetic parameters of MEF2/DNA association change substantially upon induction of differentiation to give a more stable complex and that this effect is mediated by Lys4 acetylation. We also show that Lys4 acetylation plays a prominent role in the p300-dependent activation of MEF2C.Loss-of-function studies have revealed the role of many basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors at specific points during development; however, the role of E proteins in the development of the nervous system has not been experimentally addressed. E proteins have been speculated to interact selectively with class II bHLH factors to form different neurogenic complexes. In this study, using coimmunoprecipitation in a culture model of neurogenesis (P19 cells), we show that E proteins E12, HEB, and E2-2 interact with neuroD2. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assay and P19 cell culture, we show that these heterodimers bind a neuroD2 preferred E box and induce neurogenesis equally well. We examine the mRNA levels of the three E proteins at 10 time points during brain development and show that E protein gene expression is regulated such that at certain times during development selective interaction between neuroD2 and a single E protein (HEB) is a possibility. This led us to study the brains of HEB and E2A knockout mice, which manifest no gross neuroanatomical, cellular, or behavioral deficits. These findings, together with homology in the primary peptide sequence of E proteins, suggest functional compensation among E proteins during development of the nervous system.Calcineurin is required for B cell receptor (BCR)-induced proliferation of mature B cells. Paradoxically, loss of NFAT transcription factors, themselves calcineurin targets, induces hyperactivity, which suggests that calcineurin targets other than NFAT are required for BCR-induced proliferation. Here we demonstrate a function for the calcineurin-regulated transcription factor Mef2c in B cells. BCR-induced calcium mobilization was intact after Mef2c deletion, but loss of Mef2c caused defects in B cell proliferation and survival after BCR stimulation in vitro and lower T cell-dependent antibody responses and germinal center formation in vivo. Mef2c activity was specific to BCR stimulation, as Toll-like receptor and CD40 signaling induced normal responses in Mef2c-deficient B cells. Mef2c-dependent targets included the genes encoding cyclin D2 and the prosurvival factor Bcl-x(L). Our results emphasize an unrecognized but critical function for Mef2c in BCR signaling.Control of integrin activation is required for cell adhesion and ligand-induced signaling. Here we report that loss of the focal adhesion protein Kindlin-2 in mice results in peri-implantation lethality caused by severe detachment of the endoderm and epiblast from the basement membrane. We found that Kindlin-2-deficient cells were unable to activate their integrins and that Kindlin-2 is required for talin-induced integrin activation. Furthermore, we demonstrate that Kindlin-2 is required for integrin outside-in signaling to enable firm adhesion and spreading. Our findings provide evidence that Kindlin-2 is a novel and essential element of bidirectional integrin signaling.At synapses, cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) provide the molecular framework for coordinating signaling events across the synaptic cleft. Among synaptic CAMs, the integrins, receptors for extracellular matrix proteins and counterreceptors on adjacent cells, are implicated in synapse maturation and plasticity and memory formation. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms of integrin action at central synapses. Here, we report that postsynaptic beta3 integrins control synaptic strength by regulating AMPA receptors (AMPARs) in a subunit-specific manner. Pharmacological perturbation targeting beta3 integrins promotes endocytosis of GluR2-containing AMPARs via Rap1 signaling, and expression of beta3 integrins produces robust changes in the abundance and composition of synaptic AMPARs without affecting dendritic spine structure. Importantly, homeostatic synaptic scaling induced by activity deprivation elevates surface expression of beta3 integrins, and in turn, beta3 integrins are required for synaptic scaling. Our findings demonstrate a key role for integrins in the feedback regulation of excitatory synaptic strength.PURPOSE: The goal of this study was to investigate, with the use of CaBP5 knockout mice, whether Ca(2+)-binding protein 5 (CaBP5) is required for vision. The authors also tested whether CaBP5 can modulate expressed Ca(v)1.2 voltage-activated calcium channels. METHODS: CaBP5 knockout (Cabp5(-/-)) mice were generated. The retinal morphology and visual function of 6-week-old Cabp5(-/-) mice were analyzed by confocal and electron microscopy, single-flash electroretinography, and whole-cell patch-clamp recordings of retinal ganglion cells. The interaction and modulation of Ca(v)1.2 channels by CaBP5 were analyzed using affinity chromatography, gel overlay assays, and patch-clamp recordings of transfected HEK293 cells. RESULTS: No evidence of morphologic changes and no significant difference in the amplitude of the ERG responses were observed in CaBP5 knockout mice compared with wild-type mice. However, the sensitivity of retinal ganglion cell light responses was reduced by approximately 50% in Cabp5(-/-) mice. CaBP5 directly interacted with the CaM-binding domain of Ca(v)1.2 and colocalized with Ca(v)1.2 in rod bipolar cells. In transfected HEK293T cells, CaBP5 suppressed calcium-dependent inactivation of Ca(v)1.2 and shifted the voltage dependence of activation to more depolarized membrane potentials. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence that lack of CaBP5 results in reduced sensitivity of rod-mediated light responses of retinal ganglion cells, suggestive of a role for CaBP5 in the normal transmission of light signals throughout the retinal circuitry. The interaction, colocalization, and modulation of Ca(v)1.2 by CaBP5 suggest that CaBP5 can alter retinal sensitivity through the modulation of voltage-gated calcium channels.Emerging evidence suggests that myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) transcription factors act as effectors of neurogenesis in the brain, with MEF2C the predominant isoform in developing cerebrocortex. Here, we show that conditional knockout of Mef2c in nestin-expressing neural stem/progenitor cells (NSCs) impaired neuronal differentiation in vivo, resulting in aberrant compaction and smaller somal size. NSC proliferation and survival were not affected. Conditional null mice surviving to adulthood manifested more immature electrophysiological network properties and severe behavioral deficits reminiscent of Rett syndrome, an autism-related disorder. Our data support a crucial role for MEF2C in programming early neuronal differentiation and proper distribution within the layers of the neocortex.Learning and memory depend on the activity-dependent structural plasticity of synapses and changes in neuronal gene expression. We show that deletion of the MEF2C transcription factor in the CNS of mice impairs hippocampal-dependent learning and memory. Unexpectedly, these behavioral changes were accompanied by a marked increase in the number of excitatory synapses and potentiation of basal and evoked synaptic transmission. Conversely, neuronal expression of a superactivating form of MEF2C results in a reduction of excitatory postsynaptic sites without affecting learning and memory performance. We conclude that MEF2C limits excessive synapse formation during activity-dependent refinement of synaptic connectivity and thus facilitates hippocampal-dependent learning and memory.The elucidation of protein post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation, remains a challenging analytical task for proteomic studies. Since many of the proteins targeted for phosphorylation are low in abundance and phosphorylation is typically substoichiometric, a prerequisite for their identification is the specific enrichment of phosphopeptide prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Here, we presented a new method termed as immobilized titanium ion affinity chromatography (Ti (4+)-IMAC) for enriching phosphopeptides. A phosphate polymer, which was prepared by direct polymerization of monomers containing phosphate groups, was applied to immobilize Ti (4+) through the chelating interaction between phosphate groups on the polymer and Ti (4+). The resulting Ti (4+)-IMAC resin specifically isolates phosphopeptides from a digest mixture of standard phosphoproteins and nonphosphoprotein (BSA) in a ratio as low as 1:500. Ti (4+)-IMAC was further applied for phosphoproteome analysis of mouse liver. We also compared Ti (4+)-IMAC to other enrichment methods including Fe (3+)-IMAC, Zr (4+)-IMAC, TiO 2 and ZrO 2, and demonstrate superior selectivity and efficiency of Ti (4+)-IMAC for the isolation and enrichment of phosphopeptides. The high specificity and efficiency of phosphopeptide enrichment by Ti (4+)-IMAC mainly resulted from the flexibility of immobilized titanium ion with spacer arm linked to polymer beads as well as the specific interaction between immobilized titanium ion and phosphate group on phosphopeptides.Genetic studies have highlighted the key role of Scrib in the development of Metazoans. Deficiency in Scrib impairs many aspects of cell polarity and cell movement although the mechanisms involved remain unclear. In mammals, Scrib belongs to a protein complex containing betaPIX, an exchange factor for Rac/Cdc42, and GIT1, a GTPase activating protein for ARF6 implicated in receptor recycling and exocytosis. Here we show that the Scrib complex associates with PAK, a serine-threonine kinase family crucial for cell migration. PAK colocalizes with members of the Scrib complex at the leading edge of heregulin-treated T47D breast cancer cells. We demonstrate that the Scrib complex is required for epithelial cells and primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts to efficiently respond to chemoattractant cues. In Scrib-deficient cells, the pool of cortical PAK is decreased, thereby precluding its proper activation by Rac. Loss of Scrib also impairs the polarized distribution of active Rac at the leading edge and compromises the regulated activation of the GTPase in T47D cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts. These data underscore the role of Scrib in cell migration and show the strong impact of Scrib in the function of PAK and Rac, two key molecules implicated in this process.Deficiency in the nuclear-encoded mitochondrial protein frataxin causes Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), a progressive neurodegenerative disorder associating spinocerebellar ataxia and cardiomyopathy. Although the exact function of frataxin is still a matter of debate, it is widely accepted that frataxin is a mitochondrial iron chaperone involved in iron-sulfur cluster and heme biosynthesis. Frataxin is synthesized as a precursor polypeptide, directed to the mitochondrial matrix where it is proteolytically cleaved by the mitochondrial processing peptidase to the mature form via a processing intermediate. The mature form was initially reported to be encoded by amino acids 56-210 (m(56)-FXN). However, two independent reports have challenged these studies describing two different forms encoded by amino acids 78-210 (m(78)-FXN) and 81-210 (m(81)-FXN). Here, we provide evidence that mature human frataxin corresponds to m(81)-FXN, and can rescue the lethal phenotype of fibroblasts completely deleted for frataxin. Furthermore, our data demonstrate that the migration profile of frataxin depends on the experimental conditions, a behavior which most likely contributed to the confusion concerning the endogenous mature frataxin. Interestingly, we show that m(56)-FXN and m(78)-FXN can be generated when the normal maturation process of frataxin is impaired, although the physiological relevance is not clear. Furthermore, we determine that the d-FXN form, previously reported to be a degradation product, corresponds to m(78)-FXN. Finally, we demonstrate that all frataxin isoforms are generated and localized within the mitochondria. The clear identification of the N-terminus of mature FXN is an important step for designing therapeutic approaches for FRDA based on frataxin replacement.Strong evidence indicates that regulated mRNA translation in neuronal dendrites underlies synaptic plasticity and brain development. The fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) is involved in this process; here, we show that it acts by inhibiting translation initiation. A binding partner of FMRP, CYFIP1/Sra1, directly binds the translation initiation factor eIF4E through a domain that is structurally related to those present in 4E-BP translational inhibitors. Brain cytoplasmic RNA 1 (BC1), another FMRP binding partner, increases the affinity of FMRP for the CYFIP1-eIF4E complex in the brain. Levels of proteins encoded by known FMRP target mRNAs are increased upon reduction of CYFIP1 in neurons. Translational repression is regulated in an activity-dependent manner because BDNF or DHPG stimulation of neurons causes CYFIP1 to dissociate from eIF4E at synapses, thereby resulting in protein synthesis. Thus, the translational repression activity of FMRP in the brain is mediated, at least in part, by CYFIP1.The dual-specific kinase DYRK1A (dual-specificity tyrosine phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1A) is the mammalian orthologue of the Drosophila minibrain (MNB) protein kinase and executes diverse roles in neuronal development and adult brain physiology. DYRK1A is overexpressed in Down syndrome (DS) and has recently been implicated in several neurodegenerative diseases. In an attempt to elucidate the molecular basis of its involvement in cognitive and neurodegeneration processes, we searched for novel proteins interacting with the kinase domain of DYRK1A in the adult mouse brain and identified septin 4 (SEPT4, also known as Pnutl2/CDCrel-2). SEPT4 is a member of the group III septin family of guanosine triphosphate hydrolases (GTPases), which has previously been found in neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer disease brains and in alpha-synuclein-positive cytoplasmic inclusions in Parkinson disease brains. In transfected mammalian cells, DYRK1A specifically interacts with and phosphorylates SEPT4. Phosphorylation of SEPT4 by DYRK1A was inhibited by harmine, which has recently been identified as the most specific inhibitor of DYRK1A. In support of a physiological relation in the brain, we found that Dyrk1A and Sept4 are co-expressed and co-localized in neocortical neurons. These findings suggest that SEPT4 is a substrate of DYRK1A kinase and thus provide a possible link for the involvement of DYRK1A in neurodegenerative processes and in DS neuropathologies.Hepatic glucose production is critical for basal brain function and survival when dietary glucose is unavailable. Glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) is an essential, rate-limiting enzyme that serves as a terminal gatekeeper for hepatic glucose release into the plasma. Mutations in G6Pase result in Von Gierke\'s disease (glycogen storage disease-1a), a potentially fatal genetic disorder. We have identified the transcriptional coactivator SRC-2 as a regulator of fasting hepatic glucose release, a function that SRC-2 performs by controlling the expression of hepatic G6Pase. SRC-2 modulates G6Pase expression directly by acting as a coactivator with the orphan nuclear receptor RORalpha. In addition, SRC-2 ablation, in both a whole-body and liver-specific manner, resulted in a Von Gierke\'s disease phenotype in mice. Our results position SRC-2 as a critical regulator of mammalian glucose production.We used on-line electron capture dissociation (ECD) for the large scale identification and localization of sites of phosphorylation. Each FT-ICR ECD event was paired with a linear ion trap collision-induced dissociation (CID) event, allowing a direct comparison of the relative merits of ECD and CID for phosphopeptide identification and site localization. Linear ion trap CID was shown to be most efficient for phosphopeptide identification, whereas FT-ICR ECD was superior for localization of sites of phosphorylation. The combination of confident CID and ECD identification and confident CID and ECD localization is particularly valuable in cases where a phosphopeptide is identified just once within a phosphoproteomics experiment.The ability of macrophages to clear pathogens and elicit a sustained immune response is regulated by various cytokines, including interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). To investigate the molecular mechanisms by which IFN-gamma modulates phagosome functions, we profiled the changes in composition, abundance, and phosphorylation of phagosome proteins in resting and activated macrophages by using quantitative proteomics and bioinformatics approaches. We identified 2415 phagosome proteins together with 2975 unique phosphorylation sites with a high level of sensitivity. Using network analyses, we determined that IFN-gamma delays phagosomal acquisition of lysosomal hydrolases and peptidases for the gain of antigen presentation. Furthermore, this gain in antigen presentation is dependent on phagosomal networks of the actin cytoskeleton and vesicle-trafficking proteins, as well as Src kinases and calpain proteases. Major histocompatibility complex class I antigen-presentation assays validated the molecular participation of these networks in the enhanced capacity of IFN-gamma-activated macrophages to crosspresent exogenous antigens to CD8(+) T cells.The chromodomain helicase DNA-binding (CHD) family of enzymes is thought to regulate gene expression, but their role in the regulation of specific genes has been unclear. Here we show that CHD8 is expressed at a high level during early embryogenesis and prevents apoptosis mediated by the tumour suppressor protein p53. CHD8 was found to bind to p53 and to suppress its transactivation activity. CHD8 promoted the association of p53 and histone H1, forming a trimeric complex on chromatin that was required for inhibition of p53-dependent transactivation and apoptosis. Depletion of CHD8 or histone H1 resulted in p53 activation and apoptosis. Furthermore, Chd8(-/-) mice died early during embryogenesis, manifesting widespread apoptosis, whereas deletion of p53 ameliorated this developmental arrest. These observations reveal a mode of p53 regulation mediated by CHD8, which may set a threshold for induction of apoptosis during early embryogenesis by counteracting p53 function through recruitment of histone H1.The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor stem cell leukemia gene (Scl) is a master regulator for hematopoiesis essential for hematopoietic specification and proper differentiation of the erythroid and megakaryocyte lineages. However, the critical downstream targets of Scl remain undefined. Here, we identified a novel Scl target gene, transcription factor myocyte enhancer factor 2 C (Mef2C) from Scl(fl/fl) fetal liver progenitor cell lines. Analysis of Mef2C(-/-) embryos showed that Mef2C, in contrast to Scl, is not essential for specification into primitive or definitive hematopoietic lineages. However, adult VavCre(+)Mef2C(fl/fl) mice exhibited platelet defects similar to those observed in Scl-deficient mice. The platelet counts were reduced, whereas platelet size was increased and the platelet shape and granularity were altered. Furthermore, megakaryopoiesis was severely impaired in vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation microarray hybridization analysis revealed that Mef2C is directly regulated by Scl in megakaryocytic cells, but not in erythroid cells. In addition, an Scl-independent requirement for Mef2C in B-lymphoid homeostasis was observed in Mef2C-deficient mice, characterized as severe age-dependent reduction of specific B-cell progenitor populations reminiscent of premature aging. In summary, this work identifies Mef2C as an integral member of hematopoietic transcription factors with distinct upstream regulatory mechanisms and functional requirements in megakaryocyte and B-lymphoid lineages.The N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR), a major excitatory ligand-gated ion channel in the central nervous system (CNS), is a principal mediator of synaptic plasticity. Here we report that neuropilin tolloid-like 1 (Neto1), a complement C1r/C1s, Uegf, Bmp1 (CUB) domain-containing transmembrane protein, is a novel component of the NMDAR complex critical for maintaining the abundance of NR2A-containing NMDARs in the postsynaptic density. Neto1-null mice have depressed long-term potentiation (LTP) at Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapses, with the subunit dependency of LTP induction switching from the normal predominance of NR2A- to NR2B-NMDARs. NMDAR-dependent spatial learning and memory is depressed in Neto1-null mice, indicating that Neto1 regulates NMDA receptor-dependent synaptic plasticity and cognition. Remarkably, we also found that the deficits in LTP, learning, and memory in Neto1-null mice were rescued by the ampakine CX546 at doses without effect in wild-type. Together, our results establish the principle that auxiliary proteins are required for the normal abundance of NMDAR subunits at synapses, and demonstrate that an inherited learning defect can be rescued pharmacologically, a finding with therapeutic implications for humans.Platelet P-selectin plays important roles in inflammation and contributes to thrombosis and hemostasis. Although it has been reported that von Willebrand factor (VWF) affects P-selectin expression on endothelial cells, little information is available regarding regulation of platelet P-selectin expression. Here, we first observed that P-selectin expression was significantly decreased on platelets of fibrinogen and VWF double-deficient mice. Subsequently, we identified this was due to fibrinogen deficiency. Impaired P-selectin expression on fibrinogen-deficient platelets was further confirmed in human hypofibrinogenemic patients. We demonstrated that this impairment is unlikely due to excessive P-selectin shedding, deficient fibrinogen-mediated cell surface P-selectin binding, or impaired platelet granule release, but rather is due to decreased platelet P-selectin content. Fibrinogen transfusion completely recovered this impairment in fibrinogen-deficient (Fg(-/-)) mice, and engagement of the C-terminus of the fibrinogen gamma chain with beta3 integrin was required for this process. Furthermore, Fg(-/-) platelets significantly increased P-selectin expression following transfusion into beta3 integrin-deficient mice and when cultured with fibrinogen. These data suggest fibrinogen may play important roles in inflammation, thrombosis, and hemostasis via enhancement of platelet P-selectin expression. Since human fibrinogen levels vary significantly in normal and diseased populations, P-selectin as an activation marker on platelets should be used with caution.Although the classification of cell types often relies on the identification of cell surface proteins as differentiation markers, flow cytometry requires suitable antibodies and currently permits detection of only up to a dozen differentiation markers in a single measurement. We use multiplexed mass-spectrometric identification of several hundred N-linked glycosylation sites specifically from cell surface-exposed glycoproteins to phenotype cells without antibodies in an unbiased fashion and without a priori knowledge. We apply our cell surface-capturing (CSC) technology, which covalently labels extracellular glycan moieties on live cells, to the detection and relative quantitative comparison of the cell surface N-glycoproteomes of T and B cells, as well as to monitor changes in the abundance of cell surface N-glycoprotein markers during T-cell activation and the controlled differentiation of embryonic stem cells into the neural lineage. A snapshot view of the cell surface N-glycoproteins will enable detection of panels of N-glycoproteins as potential differentiation markers that are currently not accessible by other means.Complexes involved in the gamma/epsilon-secretase-regulated intramembranous proteolysis of substrates such as the amyloid-beta precursor protein are composed primarily of presenilin (PS1 or PS2), nicastrin, anterior pharynx defective-1 (APH1), and PEN2. The presenilin aspartyl residues form the catalytic site, and similar potentially functional polar transmembrane residues in APH1 have been identified. Substitution of charged (E84A, R87A) or polar (Q83A) residues in TM3 had no effect on complex assembly or activity. In contrast, changes to either of two highly conserved histidines (H171A, H197A) located in TM5 and TM6 negatively affected PS1 cleavage and altered binding to other secretase components, resulting in decreased amyloid generating activity. Charge replacement with His-to-Lys substitutions rescued nicastrin maturation and PS1 endoproteolysis leading to assembly of the formation of structurally normal but proteolytically inactive gamma-secretase complexes. Substitution with a negatively charged side chain (His-to-Asp) or altering the structural location of the histidines also disrupted gamma-secretase binding and abolished functionality of APH1. These results suggest that the conserved transmembrane histidine residues contribute to APH1 function and can affect presenilin catalytic activity.Vascular endothelial protein tyrosine phosphatase (VE-PTP) is an endothelial-specific receptor-type tyrosine phosphatase that associates with Tie-2 and VE-cadherin. VE-PTP gene disruption leads to embryonic lethality, vascular remodeling defects, and enlargement of vascular structures in extraembryonic tissues. We show here that antibodies against the extracellular part of VE-PTP mimic the effects of VE-PTP gene disruption exemplified by vessel enlargement in allantois explants. These effects require the presence of the angiopoietin receptor Tie-2. Analyzing the mechanism we found that anti-VE-PTP antibodies trigger endocytosis and selectively affect Tie-2-associated, but not VE-cadherin-associated VE-PTP. Dissociation of VE-PTP triggers the activation of Tie-2, leading to enhanced endothelial cell proliferation and enlargement of vascular structures through activation of Erk1/2. Importantly, the antibody effect on vessel enlargement is also observed in newborn mice. We conclude that VE-PTP is required to balance Tie-2 activity and endothelial cell proliferation, thereby controlling blood vessel development and vessel size.The mouse (Mus musculus) is the premier animal model for understanding human disease and development. Here we show that a comprehensive understanding of mouse biology is only possible with the availability of a finished, high-quality genome assembly. The finished clone-based assembly of the mouse strain C57BL/6J reported here has over 175,000 fewer gaps and over 139 Mb more of novel sequence, compared with the earlier MGSCv3 draft genome assembly. In a comprehensive analysis of this revised genome sequence, we are now able to define 20,210 protein-coding genes, over a thousand more than predicted in the human genome (19,042 genes). In addition, we identified 439 long, non-protein-coding RNAs with evidence for transcribed orthologs in human. We analyzed the complex and repetitive landscape of 267 Mb of sequence that was missing or misassembled in the previously published assembly, and we provide insights into the reasons for its resistance to sequencing and assembly by whole-genome shotgun approaches. Duplicated regions within newly assembled sequence tend to be of more recent ancestry than duplicates in the published draft, correcting our initial understanding of recent evolution on the mouse lineage. These duplicates appear to be largely composed of sequence regions containing transposable elements and duplicated protein-coding genes; of these, some may be fixed in the mouse population, but at least 40% of segmentally duplicated sequences are copy number variable even among laboratory mouse strains. Mouse lineage-specific regions contain 3,767 genes drawn mainly from rapidly-changing gene families associated with reproductive functions. The finished mouse genome assembly, therefore, greatly improves our understanding of rodent-specific biology and allows the delineation of ancestral biological functions that are shared with human from derived functions that are not.Apoptotic cell death plays a normal role in various physiological processes, and deregulated apoptosis is a hallmark of several diseases, including cancer. Cell fate is dictated by the balance between pro- and antiapoptotic factors. Akt is one of these antiapoptotic factors, which must be activated through phosphorylation. The phosphorylation of Akt has previously been shown to be promoted by X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), another antiapoptotic protein dictating the fate of normal and cancer cells. However, the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. We have observed that XIAP associates with PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten), the best characterized negative regulator of Akt phosphorylation, in vitro and in vivo. XIAP knockdown reduces constitutive mono- and polyubiquitination of PTEN, increases PTEN protein levels, and prevents nuclear accumulation of PTEN. Overexpression of XIAP induces polyubiquitination of PTEN and proteasome-dependent decrease of PTEN protein levels. RNA interference experiments showed that XIAP-induced regulation of Akt phosphorylation is PTEN-dependent. Additional experiments confirmed that XIAP also regulates PTEN in vivo; primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts derived from XIAP(-/-) mice contain higher levels of PTEN protein, less mono- and polyubiquitinated PTEN, and less nuclear PTEN than primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts derived from XIAP(+/+) mice. Finally, we found that XIAP can directly ubiquitinate PTEN in vitro. We thus propose that XIAP acts as an E3 ubiquitin ligase for PTEN and promotes Akt activity by regulating PTEN content and compartmentalization.Photoreceptor ribbon synapses release glutamate in response to graded changes in membrane potential evoked by vast, logarithmically scalable light intensities. Neurotransmitter release is modulated by intracellular calcium levels. Large Ca(2+)-dependent chloride currents are important regulators of synaptic transmission from photoreceptors to second-order neurons; the molecular basis underlying these currents is unclear. We cloned human and mouse TMEM16B, a member of the TMEM16 family of transmembrane proteins, and show that it is abundantly present in the photoreceptor synaptic terminals in mouse retina. TMEM16B colocalizes with adaptor proteins PSD95, VELI3, and MPP4 at the ribbon synapses and contains a consensus PDZ class I binding motif capable of interacting with PDZ domains of PSD95. Furthermore, TMEM16B is lost from photoreceptor membranes of MPP4-deficient mice. This suggests that TMEM16B is a novel component of a presynaptic protein complex recruited to specialized plasma membrane domains of photoreceptors. TMEM16B confers Ca(2+)-dependent chloride currents when overexpressed in mammalian cells as measured by halide sensitive fluorescent protein assays and whole-cell patch-clamp recordings. The compartmentalized localization and the electrophysiological properties suggest TMEM16B to be a strong candidate for the long sought-after Ca(2+)-dependent chloride channel in the photoreceptor synapse.Adenylate kinase (AK) is a key enzyme in the high-energy phosphoryl transfer reaction in living cells. Of its isoforms, AK4 has a similar sequence and subcellular localization to that of AK3 in the mitochondrial matrix. However, unlike AK3, AK4 lacks the guanosine triphosphate: adenosine monophosphate phosphotransferase activity. To elucidate the physiological role of AK4, we explored the protein localization of AK4 in various mouse tissues by immunohistochemical analysis. AK4 protein was detected in the kidney, liver, brain, heart, stomach, intestine, and gonads but not in the lung and spleen. Interestingly, cell-type specific expression was evident in the brain, gastrointestinal tract, and gonads. In the cerebellum, AK4 was detected in granular cells but not in Purkinje cell bodies. In the gastrointestinal tract, AK4 was highly expressed in epithelia. In the ovary, AK4 was detected in oocytes and corpora lutea. In the testis, AK4 was detected in spermatocytes but not in spermatogonia. Our findings demonstrate that AK4 localizes uniquely in a cell-type and tissue-specific manner in mouse tissues.Identification of bona fide tumor suppressors is often challenging because of the large number of genetic alterations present in most human cancers. To evaluate candidate genes present within chromosomal regions recurrently deleted in human cancers, we coupled high-resolution genomic analysis with a two-stage genetic study using RNA interference (RNAi). We found that Cyfip1, a subunit of the WAVE complex, which regulates cytoskeletal dynamics, is commonly deleted in human epithelial cancers. Reduced expression of CYFIP1 is commonly observed during invasion of epithelial tumors and is associated with poor prognosis in this setting. Silencing of Cyfip1 disturbed normal epithelial morphogenesis in vitro and cooperated with oncogenic Ras to produce invasive carcinomas in vivo. Mechanistically, we have linked alterations in WAVE-regulated actin dynamics with impaired cell-cell adhesion and cell-ECM interactions. Thus, we propose Cyfip1 as an invasion suppressor gene.An open chromatin largely devoid of heterochromatin is a hallmark of stem cells. It remains unknown whether an open chromatin is necessary for the differentiation potential of stem cells, and which molecules are needed to maintain open chromatin. Here we show that the chromatin remodelling factor Chd1 is required to maintain the open chromatin of pluripotent mouse embryonic stem cells. Chd1 is a euchromatin protein that associates with the promoters of active genes, and downregulation of Chd1 leads to accumulation of heterochromatin. Chd1-deficient embryonic stem cells are no longer pluripotent, because they are incapable of giving rise to primitive endoderm and have a high propensity for neural differentiation. Furthermore, Chd1 is required for efficient reprogramming of fibroblasts to the pluripotent stem cell state. Our results indicate that Chd1 is essential for open chromatin and pluripotency of embryonic stem cells, and for somatic cell reprogramming to the pluripotent state.Data concerning the prognostic value of ErbB4 in breast cancer and effects on cell growth have varied in published reports, perhaps due to the unknown signaling consequences of expression of the intracellular proteolytic ErbB4 s80(HER4) fragment or due to differing signaling capabilities of alternatively spliced ErbB4 isoforms. One isoform (Cyt1) contains a 16-residue intracellular sequence that is absent from the other (Cyt2). We expressed s80(Cyt1) and s80(Cyt2) in HC11 mammary epithelial cells, finding diametrically opposed effects on the growth and organization of colonies in three-dimensional matrices. Whereas expression of s80(Cyt1) decreased growth and increased the rate of three-dimensional lumen formation, that of s80(Cyt2) increased proliferation without promoting lumen formation. These results were recapitulated in vivo, using doxycycline-inducible, mouse breast-transgenic expression of s80(Cyt1) amd s80(Cyt2). Expression of s80(Cyt1) decreased growth of the mammary ductal epithelium, caused precocious STAT5a activation and lactogenic differentiation, and increased cell surface E-cadherin levels. Remarkably, ductal growth inhibition by s80(Cyt1) occurred simultaneously with lobuloalveolar growth that was unimpeded by s80(Cyt1), suggesting that the response to ErbB4 may be influenced by the epithelial subtype. In contrast, expression of s80(Cyt2) caused epithelial hyperplasia, increased Wnt and nuclear beta-catenin expression, and elevated expression of c-myc and cyclin D1 in the mammary epithelium. These results demonstrate that the Cyt1 and Cyt2 ErbB4 isoforms, differing by only 16 amino acids, exhibit markedly opposing effects on mammary epithelium growth and differentiation.BACKGROUND: Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), the most common form of recessive ataxia, is due to reduced levels of frataxin, a highly conserved mitochondrial iron-chaperone involved in iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) biogenesis. Most patients are homozygous for a (GAA)(n) expansion within the first intron of the frataxin gene. A few patients, either with typical or atypical clinical presentation, are compound heterozygous for the GAA expansion and a micromutation. METHODOLOGY: We have developed a new strategy to generate murine cellular models for FRDA: cell lines carrying a frataxin conditional allele were used in combination with an EGFP-Cre recombinase to create murine cellular models depleted for endogenous frataxin and expressing missense-mutated human frataxin. We showed that complete absence of murine frataxin in fibroblasts inhibits cell division and leads to cell death. This lethal phenotype was rescued through transgenic expression of human wild type as well as mutant (hFXN(G130V) and hFXN(I154F)) frataxin. Interestingly, cells expressing the mutated frataxin presented a FRDA-like biochemical phenotype. Though both mutations affected mitochondrial ISC enzymes activities and mitochondria ultrastructure, the hFXN(I154F) mutant presented a more severe phenotype with affected cytosolic and nuclear ISC enzyme activities, mitochondrial iron accumulation and an increased sensitivity to oxidative stress. The differential phenotype correlates with disease severity observed in FRDA patients. CONCLUSIONS: These new cellular models, which are the first to spontaneously reproduce all the biochemical phenotypes associated with FRDA, are important tools to gain new insights into the in vivo consequences of pathological missense mutations as well as for large-scale pharmacological screening aimed at compensating frataxin deficiency.Many organs rely on undifferentiated stem and progenitor cells for tissue regeneration. Whether differentiated cells themselves can contribute to cell replacement and tissue regeneration is a controversial question. Here, we show that differentiated heart muscle cells, cardiomyocytes, can be induced to proliferate and regenerate. We identify an underlying molecular mechanism for controlling this process that involves the growth factor neuregulin1 (NRG1) and its tyrosine kinase receptor, ErbB4. NRG1 induces mononucleated, but not binucleated, cardiomyocytes to divide. In vivo, genetic inactivation of ErbB4 reduces cardiomyocyte proliferation, whereas increasing ErbB4 expression enhances it. Injecting NRG1 in adult mice induces cardiomyocyte cell-cycle activity and promotes myocardial regeneration, leading to improved function after myocardial infarction. Undifferentiated progenitor cells did not contribute to NRG1-induced cardiomyocyte proliferation. Thus, increasing the activity of the NRG1/ErbB4 signaling pathway may provide a molecular strategy to promote myocardial regeneration.Lipin-1 is a protein that has dual functions as a phosphatidic acid phosphohydrolase (PAP) and a nuclear transcriptional coactivator. It remains unknown how the nuclear localization and coactivator functions of lipin-1 are regulated. Here, we show that lipin-1 (including both the alpha and beta isoforms) is modified by sumoylation at two consensus sumoylation sites. We are unable to detect sumoylation of the related proteins lipin-2 and lipin-3. Lipin-1 is sumoylated at relatively high levels in brain, where lipin-1alpha is the predominant form. In cultured embryonic cortical neurons and SH-SY5Y neuronal cells, ectopically expressed lipin-1alpha is localized in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm, and the nuclear localization is abrogated by mutating the consensus sumyolation motifs. The sumoylation site mutant of lipin-1alpha loses the capacity to coactivate the transcriptional (co-) activators PGC-1alpha and MEF2, consistent with its nuclear exclusion. Thus, these results show that sumoylation facilitates the nuclear localization and transcriptional coactivator behavior of lipin-1alpha that we observe in cultured neuronal cells, and suggest that lipin-1alpha may act as a sumoylation-regulated transcriptional coactivator in brain.Disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (DISC1), a susceptibility gene for major mental illnesses, regulates multiple aspects of embryonic and adult neurogenesis. Here, we show that DISC1 suppression in newborn neurons of the adult hippocampus leads to overactivated signaling of AKT, another schizophrenia susceptibility gene. Mechanistically, DISC1 directly interacts with KIAA1212, an AKT binding partner that enhances AKT signaling in the absence of DISC1, and DISC1 binding to KIAA1212 prevents AKT activation in vitro. Functionally, multiple genetic manipulations to enhance AKT signaling in adult-born neurons in vivo exhibit similar defects as DISC1 suppression in neuronal development that can be rescued by pharmacological inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), an AKT downstream effector. Our study identifies the AKT-mTOR signaling pathway as a critical DISC1 target in regulating neuronal development and provides a framework for understanding how multiple susceptibility genes may functionally converge onto a common pathway in contributing to the etiology of certain psychiatric disorders.We used the muscle creatine kinase (MCK) conditional frataxin knockout mouse to elucidate how frataxin deficiency alters iron metabolism. This is of significance because frataxin deficiency leads to Friedreich\'s ataxia, a disease marked by neurologic and cardiologic degeneration. Using cardiac tissues, we demonstrate that frataxin deficiency leads to down-regulation of key molecules involved in 3 mitochondrial utilization pathways: iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) synthesis (iron-sulfur cluster scaffold protein1/2 and the cysteine desulferase Nfs1), mitochondrial iron storage (mitochondrial ferritin), and heme synthesis (5-aminolevulinate dehydratase, coproporphyrinogen oxidase, hydroxymethylbilane synthase, uroporphyrinogen III synthase, and ferrochelatase). This marked decrease in mitochondrial iron utilization and resultant reduced release of heme and ISC from the mitochondrion could contribute to the excessive mitochondrial iron observed. This effect is compounded by increased iron availability for mitochondrial uptake through (i) transferrin receptor1 up-regulation, increasing iron uptake from transferrin; (ii) decreased ferroportin1 expression, limiting iron export; (iii) increased expression of the heme catabolism enzyme heme oxygenase1 and down-regulation of ferritin-H and -L, both likely leading to increased "free iron" for mitochondrial uptake; and (iv) increased expression of the mammalian exocyst protein Sec15l1 and the mitochondrial iron importer mitoferrin-2 (Mfrn2), which facilitate cellular iron uptake and mitochondrial iron influx, respectively. Our results enable the construction of a model explaining the cytosolic iron deficiency and mitochondrial iron loading in the absence of frataxin, which is important for understanding the pathogenesis of Friedreich\'s ataxia.Wnt signalling maintains the undifferentiated state of intestinal crypt/progenitor cells through the TCF4/beta-catenin-activating transcriptional complex. In colorectal cancer, activating mutations in Wnt pathway components lead to inappropriate activation of the TCF4/beta-catenin transcriptional programme and tumourigenesis. The mechanisms by which TCF4/beta-catenin activate key target genes are not well understood. Using a proteomics approach, we identified Tnik, a member of the germinal centre kinase family as a Tcf4 interactor in the proliferative crypts of mouse small intestine. Tnik is recruited to promoters of Wnt target genes in mouse crypts and in Ls174T colorectal cancer cells in a beta-catenin-dependent manner. Depletion of TNIK and expression of TNIK kinase mutants abrogated TCF-LEF transcription, highlighting the essential function of the kinase activity in Wnt target gene activation. In vitro binding and kinase assays show that TNIK directly binds both TCF4 and beta-catenin and phosphorylates TCF4. siRNA depletion of TNIK followed by expression array analysis showed that TNIK is an essential, specific activator of Wnt transcriptional programme. This kinase may present an attractive candidate for drug targeting in colorectal cancer.Brd4 is a member of the bromodomains and extra terminal domain (BET) family of proteins that recognize acetylated chromatin structures through their bromodomains and act as transcriptional activators. Brd4 functions as an associated factor and positive regulator of P-TEFb, a Cdk9-cyclin T heterodimer that stimulates transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II. Here, the crystal structures of the two bromodomains of Brd4 (BD1 and BD2) were determined at 1.5 and 1.2 A resolution, respectively. Complex formation of BD1 with a histone H3 tail polypeptide encompassing residues 12-19 showed binding of the Nzeta-acetylated lysine 14 to the conserved asparagine 140 of Brd4. In contrast, in BD2 the N-terminal linker sequence was found to interact with the binding site for acetylated lysines of the adjacent molecule to form continuous strings in the crystal lattice. This assembly shows for the first time a different binding ligand than acetylated lysine indicating that also other sequence compositions may be able to form similar interaction networks. Isothermal titration calorimetry revealed best binding of BD1 to H3 and of BD2 to H4 acetylated lysine sequences, suggesting alternating histone recognition specificities. Intriguingly, an acetylated lysine motif from cyclin T1 bound similarly well to BD2. Whereas the structure of Brd2 BD1 suggested its dimer formation, both Brd4 bromodomains appeared monomeric in solution as shown by size exclusion chromatography and mutational analyses.Semaphorin 5A (mouse, Sema5A; human, SEMA5A), is an axon regulator molecule and plays major roles during neuronal and vascular development. The importance of Sema5A during vasculogenesis, however, is unclear. The fact that Sema5A deficient mice display a defective branching of cranial vasculature supports its participation in blood vessel formation. In this study, we tested our hypothesis that Sema5A regulates angiogenesis by modulating various steps during angiogenesis. Accordingly, we demonstrated that the treatment of immortalized endothelial cells with recombinant extracellular domain of mouse Sema5A significantly increased endothelial cell proliferation and migration and decreased apoptosis. We also observed a relative increase of endothelial expression of anti-apoptotic genes relative to pro-apoptotic genes in Sema5A-treated endothelial cells suggesting its role in inhibition of apoptosis. In addition, our data suggest that Sema5A decreases apoptosis through activation of Akt, increases migration through activating Met tyrosine kinases and extracellular matrix degradation through matrix metalloproteinase 9. Moreover, in vivo Matrigel plug assays demonstrated that Sema5A induces endothelial cell migration from pre-existing vessels. In conclusion, the present work shows the pro-angiogenic role of Sema5A and provides clues on the signaling pathways that underlie them.Hausp is a deubiquitinase that has been shown to regulate the p53-Mdm2 pathway. Cotransfection of p53 and Hausp stabilizes p53 through the removal of ubiquitin moieties from polyubiquitinated p53. Interestingly, knockout or RNA interference-mediated knockdown of Hausp in human cells also resulted in the stabilization of p53 due to the destabilization of Mdm2, suggesting a dynamic role of Hausp in p53 activation. To understand the physiological functions of Hausp, we generated hausp knockout mice. Hausp knockout mice die during early embryonic development between embryonic days E6.5 and E7.5. The hausp knockout embryos showed p53 activation, but no apparent increase in apoptosis. Embryonic lethality was caused by a dramatic reduction in proliferation and termination in development, in part due to p53 activation and/or abrogation of p53-independent functions. Although deletion of p53 did not completely rescue the embryonic lethality of the hausp knockout, embryonic development was extended in both hausp and p53 double knockout embryos. These data show that Hausp has a critical role in regulating the p53-Mdm2 pathway.Rho kinases belong to a family of serine/threonine kinases whose role in recruitment and migration of inflammatory cells is poorly understood. We show that deficiency of ROCK1 results in increased recruitment and migration of macrophages and neutrophils in vitro and in vivo. Enhanced migration resulting from ROCK1 deficiency is observed despite normal expression of ROCK2 and a significant reduction in overall ROCK activity. ROCK1 directly binds PTEN in response to receptor activation and is essential for PTEN phosphorylation and stability. In the absence of ROCK1, PTEN phosphorylation, stability, and its activity are significantly impaired. Consequently, increased activation of downstream targets of PTEN, including PIP3, AKT, GSK-3beta, and cyclin D1, is observed. Our results reveal ROCK1 as a physiologic regulator of PTEN whose function is to repress excessive recruitment of macrophages and neutrophils during acute inflammation.Clustered Kv1 K(+) channels regulate neuronal excitability at juxtaparanodes of myelinated axons, axon initial segments, and cerebellar basket cell terminals (BCTs). These channels are part of a larger protein complex that includes cell adhesion molecules and scaffolding proteins. To identify proteins that regulate assembly, clustering, and/or maintenance of axonal Kv1 channel protein complexes, we immunoprecipitated Kv1.2 alpha subunits, and then used mass spectrometry to identify interacting proteins. We found that a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 22 (ADAM22) is a component of the Kv1 channel complex and that ADAM22 coimmunoprecipitates Kv1.2 and the membrane-associated guanylate kinases (MAGUKs) PSD-93 and PSD-95. When coexpressed with MAGUKs in heterologous cells, ADAM22 and Kv1 channels are recruited into membrane surface clusters. However, coexpression of Kv1.2 with ADAM22 and MAGUKs does not alter channel properties. Among all the known Kv1 channel-interacting proteins, only ADAM22 is found at every site where Kv1 channels are clustered. Analysis of Caspr-null mice showed that, like other previously described juxtaparanodal proteins, disruption of the paranodal junction resulted in redistribution of ADAM22 into paranodal zones. Analysis of Caspr2-, PSD-93-, PSD-95-, and double PSD-93/PSD-95-null mice showed ADAM22 clustering at BCTs requires PSD-95, but ADAM22 clustering at juxtaparanodes requires neither PSD-93 nor PSD-95. In direct contrast, analysis of ADAM22-null mice demonstrated juxtaparanodal clustering of PSD-93 and PSD-95 requires ADAM22, whereas Kv1.2 and Caspr2 clustering is normal in ADAM22-null mice. Thus, ADAM22 is an axonal component of the Kv1 K(+) channel complex that recruits MAGUKs to juxtaparanodes.Circadian molecular oscillation is generated by a transcription/translation-based feedback loop in which CRY proteins play critical roles as potent inhibitors for E-box-dependent clock gene expression. Although CRY2 undergoes rhythmic phosphorylation in its C-terminal tail, structurally distinct from the CRY1 tail, little is understood about how protein kinase(s) controls the CRY2-specific phosphorylation and contributes to the molecular clockwork. Here we found that Ser557 in the C-terminal tail of CRY2 is phosphorylated by DYRK1A as a priming kinase for subsequent GSK-3beta (glycogen synthase kinase 3beta)-mediated phosphorylation of Ser553, which leads to proteasomal degradation of CRY2. In the mouse liver, DYRK1A kinase activity toward Ser557 of CRY2 showed circadian variation, with its peak in the accumulating phase of CRY2 protein. Knockdown of Dyrk1a caused abnormal accumulation of cytosolic CRY2, advancing the timing of a nuclear increase of CRY2, and shortened the period length of the cellular circadian rhythm. Expression of an S557A/S553A mutant of CRY2 phenocopied the effect of Dyrk1a knockdown in terms of the circadian period length of the cellular clock. DYRK1A is a novel clock component cooperating with GSK-3beta and governs the Ser557 phosphorylation-triggered degradation of CRY2.A fundamental biologic principle is that diverse biologic signals are channeled through shared signaling cascades to regulate development. Large scaffold proteins that bind multiple proteins are capable of coordinating shared signaling pathways to provide specificity to activation of key developmental genes. Although much is known about transcription factors and target genes that regulate cardiomyocyte differentiation, less is known about scaffold proteins that couple signals at the cell surface to differentiation factors in developing heart cells. Here we show that AKAP13 (also known as Brx-1, AKAP-Lbc, and proto-Lbc), a unique protein kinase A-anchoring protein (AKAP) guanine nucleotide exchange region belonging to the Dbl family of oncogenes, is essential for cardiac development. Cardiomyocytes of Akap13-null mice had deficient sarcomere formation, and developing hearts were thin-walled and mice died at embryonic day 10.5-11.0. Disruption of Akap13 was accompanied by reduced expression of Mef2C. Consistent with a role of AKAP13 upstream of MEF2C, Akap13 siRNA led to a reduction in Mef2C mRNA, and overexpression of AKAP13 augmented MEF2C-dependent reporter activity. The results suggest that AKAP13 coordinates Galpha(12) and Rho signaling to an essential transcription program in developing cardiomyocytes.DYRK1A (the dual specificity tyrosine phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1A) plays an important role in body growth and brain physiology. Overexpression of this kinase has been associated with the development of Down syndrome in both human and animal models, whereas single copy loss-of-function of DYRK1A leads to increased apoptosis and decreased brain size. Although more than a dozen of DYRK1A targets have been identified, the molecular basis of its involvement in neuronal development remains unclear. Here we show that DYRK1A and another pro-survival member of the DYRK family, DYRK3, promote cell survival through phosphorylation and activation of SIRT1, an NAD(+)-dependent protein deacetylase that is essential in a variety of physiological processes including stress response and energy metabolism. DYRK1A and DYRK3 directly phosphorylate SIRT1 at Thr(522), promoting deacetylation of p53. A SIRT1 phosphorylation mimetic (SIRT1 T522D) displays elevated deacetylase activity, thus inhibiting cell apoptosis. Conversely, a SIRT1 dephosphorylation mimetic (SIRT1 T522V) fails to mediate DYRK-induced deacetylation of p53 and cell survival. We show that knockdown of endogenous DYRK1A and DYRK3 leads to hypophosphorylation of SIRT1, sensitizing cells to DNA damage-induced cell death. We also provide evidence that phosphorylation of Thr(522) activates SIRT1 by promoting product release, thereby increasing its enzymatic turnover. Taken together, our findings provide a novel mechanism by which two anti-apoptotic DYRK members promote cell survival through direct modification of SIRT1. These findings may have important implications in understanding the molecular mechanisms of tumorigenesis, Down syndrome, and aging.A family of integral membrane proteins containing a signature DHHC motif has been shown to display protein S-acyltransferase activity, modifying cysteine residues in proteins with fatty acids. The physiological roles of these proteins have largely been unexplored. Here we report that mice homozygous for a hypomorphic allele of a previously uncharacterized member, DHHC5, are born at half the expected rate, and survivors show a marked deficit in contextual fear conditioning, an indicator of defective hippocampal-dependent learning. DHHC5 is highly enriched in a post-synaptic density preparation and co-immunoprecipitates with post-synaptic density protein-95 (PSD-95), an interaction that is mediated through binding of the carboxyl terminus of DHHC5 and the PDZ3 domain of PSD-95. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that DHHC5 is expressed in the CA3 and dentate gyrus in the hippocampus. These findings point to a previously unsuspected role for DHHC5 in post-synaptic function affecting learning and memory.The KY protein underlies a form of muscular dystrophy in the mouse but its role in muscle remains elusive. Immunodetection of endogenous KY protein in C2C12-derived myotubes and expression of a recombinant form in neonatal cardiomyocytes indicated that KY is a Z-band associated protein. Moreover, characterization of a KY interacting protein fragment led to the identification of Igfn1 (Immunoglobulin-like and fibronectin type 3 domain containing 1). Igfn1 is a transcriptionally complex locus encoding many protein variants. A yeast two-hybrid screen identified the Z-band protein filamin C (FLNC) as an interacting partner. Consistent with this, expression of an IGFN1 recombinant fragment showed that the three N-terminal globular domains, common to at least five IGFN1 variants, are sufficient to provide Z-band targeting. Taken together, the yeast two-hybrid, biochemical and immunofluorescence data support the notion that KY, IGFN1 and FLNC are part of a Z-band associated protein complex likely to provide structural support to the skeletal muscle sarcomere.Prophase I of male meiosis during early spermatogenesis involves dynamic chromosome segregation processes, including synapsis, meiotic recombination and cohesion. Genetic defects in the genes that participate in these processes consistently cause reproduction failure in mice. To identify candidate genes responsible for infertility in humans, we performed gene expression profiling of mouse spermatogenic cells undergoing meiotic prophase I. Cell fractions enriched in spermatogonia, leptotene/zygotene spermatocytes or pachytene spermatocytes from developing mouse testis were separately isolated by density gradient sedimentation and subjected to microarray analysis. A total of 726 genes were identified that were upregulated in leptotene/zygotene spermatocytes. To evaluate the screening efficiency for meiosis-specific genes, we randomly selected 12 genes from this gene set and characterized each gene product using reverse transcription (RT)-PCR of RNA from gonadal tissues, in situ hybridization on testicular tissue sections and subcellular localization analysis of the encoded protein. Four of the 12 genes were confirmed as genes expressed in meiotic stage and 2 of these 4 genes were novel, previously uncharacterized genes. Among the three confirmation methods that were used, RT-PCR appeared to be the most efficient method for further screening. These 726 candidates for human infertility genes might serve as a useful resource for next-generation sequencing combined with exon capture by microarray.Lymphocytes and neutrophils are rapidly depleted by systemic infection. Progenitor cells of the haematopoietic system, such as common myeloid progenitors and common lymphoid progenitors, increase the production of immune cells to restore and maintain homeostasis during chronic infection, but the contribution of haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) to this process is largely unknown. Here we show, using an in vivo mouse model of Mycobacterium avium infection, that an increased proportion of long-term repopulating HSCs proliferate during M. avium infection, and that this response requires interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) but not interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) signalling. Thus, the haematopoietic response to chronic bacterial infection involves the activation not only of intermediate blood progenitors but of long-term repopulating HSCs as well. IFN-gamma is sufficient to promote long-term repopulating HSC proliferation in vivo; furthermore, HSCs from IFN-gamma-deficient mice have a lower proliferative rate, indicating that baseline IFN-gamma tone regulates HSC activity. These findings implicate IFN-gamma both as a regulator of HSCs during homeostasis and under conditions of infectious stress. Our studies contribute to a deeper understanding of haematological responses in patients with chronic infections such as HIV/AIDS or tuberculosis.Hypertrophic heart disease is a leading health problem in Western countries. Here we identified the small EF hand domain-containing protein Ca(2+) and integrin-binding protein-1 (CIB1) in a screen for previously unknown regulators of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Yeast two-hybrid screening for CIB1-interacting partners identified a related EF hand domain-containing protein, calcineurin B, the regulatory subunit of the prohypertrophic protein phosphatase calcineurin. CIB1 localizes primarily to the sarcolemma in mouse and human myocardium, where it anchors calcineurin to control its activation in coordination with the L-type Ca(2+) channel. CIB1 protein amounts and membrane association were enhanced in cardiac pathological hypertrophy, but not in physiological hypertrophy. Consistent with these observations, Cib1-deleted mice showed a marked reduction in myocardial hypertrophy, fibrosis, cardiac dysfunction and calcineurin-nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) activity after pressure overload, whereas the degree of physiologic hypertrophy after swimming exercise was not altered. Transgenic mice with inducible and cardiac-specific overexpression of CIB1 showed enhanced cardiac hypertrophy in response to pressure overload or calcineurin signaling. Moreover, mice lacking Ppp3cb (encoding calcineurin A, beta isozyme) showed no enhancement in cardiac hypertrophy associated with CIB1 overexpression. Thus, CIB1 functions as a previously undescribed regulator of cardiac hypertrophy through its ability to regulate the association of calcineurin with the sarcolemma and its activation.By studying primary isogenic murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), we have shown that PLK3 null MEFs contain a reduced level of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) and increased Akt1 activation coupled with decreased GSK3beta activation under normoxia and hypoxia. Purified recombinant Plk3, but not a kinase-defective mutant, efficiently phosphorylates PTEN in vitro. Mass spectrometry identifies threonine 366 and serine 370 as two putative residues that are phosphorylated by Plk3. Immunoblotting using a phosphospecific antibody confirms these sites as Plk3 phosphorylation sites. Moreover, treatment of MEFs with LiCl, an inhibitor of GSK3beta and CK2, only partially suppresses the phosphorylation, suggesting Plk3 as an additional kinase that phosphorylates these sites in vivo. Plk3-targeting mutants of PTEN are expressed at a reduced level in comparison with the wild-type counterpart, which is associated with an enhanced activity of PDK1, an upstream activator of Akt1. Furthermore, the reduced level of PTEN in PLK3 null MEFs is stabilized by treatment with MG132, a proteosome inhibitor. Combined, our study identifies Plk3 as a new player in the regulation of the PI3K/PDK1/Akt signaling axis by phosphorylation and stabilization of PTEN.BACKGROUND: Growth factor receptor bound (Grb) proteins 7, 10 and 14 are a family of structurally related multi-domain adaptor proteins involved in a variety of biological processes. Grb7, 10 and 14 are known to become serine and/or threonine phosphorylated in response to growth factor (GF) stimulation. Grb7 and 10 have also been shown to become tyrosine phosphorylated under certain conditions. Under experimental conditions Grb7 is tyrosine phosphorylated by the Tie2/Tie-2/Tek angiogenic receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK). Furthermore, Grb14 has also been shown to interact with Tie2, however tyrosine phosphorylation of this Grb family member has yet to be reported. RESULTS: Here we report for the first time tyrosine phosphorylation of Grb14. This phosphorylation requires a kinase competent Tie2 as well as intact tyrosines 1100 and 1106 (Y1100 and Y1106) on the receptor. Furthermore, a complete SH2 domain on Grb14 is required for Grb14 tyrosine phosphorylation by Tie2. Grb14 was also able to become tyrosine phosphorylated in primary endothelial cells when treated with a soluble and potent variant of the Tie2 ligand, cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) Ang1. CONCLUSION: Our results show that Grb14, like its family members Grb7 and Grb10, is able to be tyrosine phosphorylated. Furthermore, our data indicate a role for Grb14 in endothelial signaling downstream of the Tie2 receptor.The classical view of the molecular clock is based on interlocked transcriptional-translational feedback loops. Because a substantial fraction of the mammalian genome is expressed in a circadian manner, chromatin remodeling has been proposed to be crucial in clock function. Here we show that Lys4 (K4) trimethylation of histone H3 is rhythmic and follows the same profile as previously described H3 acetylation on circadian promoters. MLL1, a mammalian homolog of Drosophila trithorax, is an H3K4-specific methyltransferase implicated in transcriptional control. We demonstrate that MLL1 is essential for circadian transcription and cyclic H3K4 trimethylation. MLL1 is in a complex with CLOCK-BMAL1 and contributes to its rhythmic recruitment to circadian promoters and to H3 acetylation. Yet MLL1 fails to interact with CLOCKDelta19, providing an explanation for this mutation\'s dominant negative phenotype. Our results favor a scenario in which H3K4 trimethylation by MLL1 is required to establish a permissive chromatin state for circadian transcription.Although most tissues in an organism are genetically identical, the biochemistry of each is optimized to fulfill its unique physiological roles, with important consequences for human health and disease. Each tissue\'s unique physiology requires tightly regulated gene and protein expression coordinated by specialized, phosphorylation-dependent intracellular signaling. To better understand the role of phosphorylation in maintenance of physiological differences among tissues, we performed proteomic and phosphoproteomic characterizations of nine mouse tissues. We identified 12,039 proteins, including 6296 phosphoproteins harboring nearly 36,000 phosphorylation sites. Comparing protein abundances and phosphorylation levels revealed specialized, interconnected phosphorylation networks within each tissue while suggesting that many proteins are regulated by phosphorylation independently of their expression. Our data suggest that the "typical" phosphoprotein is widely expressed yet displays variable, often tissue-specific phosphorylation that tunes protein activity to the specific needs of each tissue. We offer this dataset as an online resource for the biological research community.L-type calcium currents conducted by CaV1.2 channels initiate excitation-contraction coupling in cardiac and vascular smooth muscle. In the heart, the distal portion of the C terminus (DCT) is proteolytically processed in vivo and serves as a noncovalently associated autoinhibitor of CaV1.2 channel activity. This autoinhibitory complex, with A-kinase anchoring protein-15 (AKAP15) bound to the DCT, is hypothesized to serve as the substrate for beta-adrenergic regulation in the fight-or-flight response. Mice expressing CaV1.2 channels with the distal C terminus deleted (DCT-/-) develop cardiac hypertrophy and die prematurely after E15. Cardiac hypertrophy and survival rate were improved by drug treatments that reduce peripheral vascular resistance and hypertension, consistent with the hypothesis that CaV1.2 hyperactivity in vascular smooth muscle causes hypertension, hypertrophy, and premature death. However, in contrast to expectation, L-type Ca2+ currents in cardiac myocytes from DCT-/- mice were dramatically reduced due to decreased cell-surface expression of CaV1.2 protein, and the voltage dependence of activation and the kinetics of inactivation were altered. CaV1.2 channels in DCT-/- myocytes fail to respond to activation of adenylyl cyclase by forskolin, and the localized expression of AKAP15 is reduced. Therefore, we conclude that the DCT of CaV1.2 channels is required in vivo for normal vascular regulation, cell-surface expression of CaV1.2 channels in cardiac myocytes, and beta-adrenergic stimulation of L-type Ca2+ currents in the heart.In mammals Dnmt1 is the DNA methyltransferase chiefly responsible for maintaining genomic methylation patterns through DNA replication cycles, but how its maintenance activity is controlled is still not well understood. Interestingly, Uhrf1, a crucial cofactor for maintenance of DNA methylation by Dnmt1, is endowed with E3 ubiquitin ligase activity. Here, we show that both Dnmt1 and Uhrf1 coprecipitate with ubiquitin specific peptidase 7 (Usp7), a de-ubiquitinating enzyme. Overexpression of Uhrf1 and Usp7 resulted in opposite changes in the ubiquitination status and stability of Dnmt1. Our findings suggest that, by balancing Dnmt1 ubiquitination, Usp7 and Uhrf1 fine tune Dnmt1 stability.Neuregulin-1 (Nrg1) and its receptor ErbB4 are encoded by genes that have been repeatedly linked to schizophrenia. Both genes are thought to play important roles in the development of brain circuitry, but their precise contribution to the disease process remains unknown. In this review, we summarize novel findings on the biological function of Nrg1 and ErbB4 in mice, with a focus on the development of inhibitory circuits in the cerebral cortex. We will also discuss how this basic knowledge may help us to understand the etiology of schizophrenia, and eventually lead to the development of novel therapies for treating the disorder.Histone H3K4 methylation is associated with active genes and, along with H3K27 methylation, is part of a bivalent chromatin mark that typifies poised developmental genes in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). However, its functional roles in ESC maintenance and differentiation are not established. Here we show that mammalian Dpy-30, a core subunit of the SET1/MLL histone methyltransferase complexes, modulates H3K4 methylation in vitro, and directly regulates chromosomal H3K4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) throughout the mammalian genome. Depletion of Dpy-30 does not affect ESC self-renewal, but significantly alters the differentiation potential of ESCs, particularly along the neural lineage. The differentiation defect is accompanied by defects in gene induction and in H3K4 methylation at key developmental loci. Our results strongly indicate an essential functional role for Dpy-30 and SET1/MLL complex-mediated H3K4 methylation, as a component of the bivalent mark, at developmental genes during the ESC fate transitions.The synaptic insertion or removal of AMPA receptors (AMPAR) plays critical roles in the regulation of synaptic activity reflected in the expression of long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD). The cellular events underlying this important process in learning and memory are still being revealed. Here we describe and characterize the AAA+ ATPase Thorase, which regulates the expression of surface AMPAR. In an ATPase-dependent manner Thorase mediates the internalization of AMPAR by disassembling the AMPAR-GRIP1 complex. Following genetic deletion of Thorase, the internalization of AMPAR is substantially reduced, leading to increased amplitudes of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents, enhancement of LTP, and elimination of LTD. These molecular events are expressed as deficits in learning and memory in Thorase null mice. This study identifies an AAA+ ATPase that plays a critical role in regulating the surface expression of AMPAR and thereby regulates synaptic plasticity and learning and memory.T-helper cells that produce interleukin-17 (T(H)17 cells) are a recently identified CD4(+) T-cell subset with characterized pathological roles in autoimmune diseases. The nuclear receptors retinoic-acid-receptor-related orphan receptors alpha and gammat (RORalpha and RORgammat, respectively) have indispensible roles in the development of this cell type. Here we present SR1001, a high-affinity synthetic ligand-the first in a new class of compound-that is specific to both RORalpha and RORgammat and which inhibits T(H)17 cell differentiation and function. SR1001 binds specifically to the ligand-binding domains of RORalpha and RORgammat, inducing a conformational change within the ligand-binding domain that encompasses the repositioning of helix 12 and leads to diminished affinity for co-activators and increased affinity for co-repressors, resulting in suppression of the receptors\' transcriptional activity. SR1001 inhibited the development of murine T(H)17 cells, as demonstrated by inhibition of interleukin-17A gene expression and protein production. Furthermore, SR1001 inhibited the expression of cytokines when added to differentiated murine or human T(H)17 cells. Finally, SR1001 effectively suppressed the clinical severity of autoimmune disease in mice. Our data demonstrate the feasibility of targeting the orphan receptors RORalpha and RORgammat to inhibit specifically T(H)17 cell differentiation and function, and indicate that this novel class of compound has potential utility in the treatment of autoimmune diseases.We previously established an anti-sperm head auto-monoclonal antibody designated Ts4. The immunoreactivity of this antibody was also observed in other reproduction-related cells, such as testicular germ cells and early embryos, suggesting that the Ts4-recognized molecules might play a role in the reproductive process. However, the molecular characteristics and functions of the antigens warrant further clarification. In this study, we primarily attempted identification of the mAb-recognized molecules within the mouse testis. An immunoprecipitation method, together with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, revealed that the testicular immunoprecipitants with Ts4 contained dipeptidase 3 (DPEP3), a member of the membrane-bound dipeptidase family. A Western blot analysis using an anti-DPEP3 polyclonal antibody established in this study showed that this molecule was glycosylated and formed a disulfide-linked homodimer within the testis. Expression of DPEP3 protein was observed in the testicular germ cells, but not in the Sertoli or interstitial cells, or in any other major organs. Although Western blot analysis of testicular proteins separated by two-dimensional SDS-PAGE failed to demonstrate binding of Ts4 to DPEP3, we found that DPEP3 forms complexes with Ts4-immunoreactive molecules, such as TEX101, on the surfaces of spermatocytes, spermatids, and testicular spermatozoa. Based on data showing in the present study, further studies concerning DPEP3 on the testicular germ cells may help to clarify the molecular mechanisms of testicular germ-cell development.Mutations in the gene encoding Parkin are a major cause of recessive Parkinson\'s disease. Recent work has shown that Parkin translocates from the cytosol to depolarized mitochondria and induces their autophagic removal (mitophagy). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying Parkin-mediated mitophagy are poorly understood. Here, we investigated whether Parkin interacts with autophagy-regulating proteins. We purified Parkin and associated proteins from HEK293 cells using tandem affinity purification and identified the Parkin interactors using mass spectrometry. We identified the autophagy-promoting protein Ambra1 (activating molecule in Beclin1-regulated autophagy) as a Parkin interactor. Ambra1 activates autophagy in the CNS by stimulating the activity of the class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) complex that is essential for the formation of new phagophores. We found Ambra1, like Parkin, to be widely expressed in adult mouse brain, including midbrain dopaminergic neurons. Endogenous Parkin and Ambra1 coimmunoprecipitated from HEK293 cells, SH-SY5Y cells, and adult mouse brain. We found no evidence for ubiquitination of Ambra1 by Parkin. The interaction of endogenous Parkin and Ambra1 strongly increased during prolonged mitochondrial depolarization. Ambra1 was not required for Parkin translocation to depolarized mitochondria but was critically important for subsequent mitochondrial clearance. In particular, Ambra1 was recruited to perinuclear clusters of depolarized mitochondria and activated class III PI3K in their immediate vicinity. These data identify interaction of Parkin with Ambra1 as a key mechanism for induction of the final clearance step of Parkin-mediated mitophagy.Epigenetic pathways can regulate gene expression by controlling and interpreting chromatin modifications. Cancer cells are characterized by altered epigenetic landscapes, and commonly exploit the chromatin regulatory machinery to enforce oncogenic gene expression programs. Although chromatin alterations are, in principle, reversible and often amenable to drug intervention, the promise of targeting such pathways therapeutically has been limited by an incomplete understanding of cancer-specific dependencies on epigenetic regulators. Here we describe a non-biased approach to probe epigenetic vulnerabilities in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), an aggressive haematopoietic malignancy that is often associated with aberrant chromatin states. By screening a custom library of small hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) targeting known chromatin regulators in a genetically defined AML mouse model, we identify the protein bromodomain-containing 4 (Brd4) as being critically required for disease maintenance. Suppression of Brd4 using shRNAs or the small-molecule inhibitor JQ1 led to robust antileukaemic effects in vitro and in vivo, accompanied by terminal myeloid differentiation and elimination of leukaemia stem cells. Similar sensitivities were observed in a variety of human AML cell lines and primary patient samples, revealing that JQ1 has broad activity in diverse AML subtypes. The effects of Brd4 suppression are, at least in part, due to its role in sustaining Myc expression to promote aberrant self-renewal, which implicates JQ1 as a pharmacological means to suppress MYC in cancer. Our results establish small-molecule inhibition of Brd4 as a promising therapeutic strategy in AML and, potentially, other cancers, and highlight the utility of RNA interference (RNAi) screening for revealing epigenetic vulnerabilities that can be exploited for direct pharmacological intervention.In the vertebrate retina, neurites from distinct neuronal cell types are constrained within the plexiform layers, allowing for establishment of retinal lamination. However, the mechanisms by which retinal neurites are segregated within the inner or outer plexiform layers are not known. We find that the transmembrane semaphorins Sema5A and Sema5B constrain neurites from multiple retinal neuron subtypes within the inner plexiform layer (IPL). In Sema5A-/-; Sema5B-/- mice, retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and amacrine and bipolar cells exhibit severe defects leading to neurite mistargeting into the outer portions of the retina. These targeting abnormalities are more prominent in the outer (OFF) layers of the IPL and result in functional defects in select RGC response properties. Sema5A and Sema5B inhibit retinal neurite outgrowth through PlexinA1 and PlexinA3 receptors both in vitro and in vivo. These findings define a set of ligands and receptors required for the establishment of inner retinal lamination and function.Axial patterning of the embryonic brain requires a precise balance between canonical Wnt signaling, which dorsalizes the nervous system, and Sonic hedgehog (Shh), which ventralizes it. The ventral anterior homeobox (Vax) transcription factors are induced by Shh and ventralize the forebrain through a mechanism that is poorly understood. We therefore sought to delineate direct Vax target genes. Among these, we identify an extraordinarily conserved intronic region within the gene encoding Tcf7l2, a key mediator of canonical Wnt signaling. This region functions as a Vax2-activated internal promoter that drives the expression of dnTcf7l2, a truncated Tcf7l2 isoform that cannot bind beta-catenin and that therefore acts as a potent dominant-negative Wnt antagonist. Vax2 concomitantly activates the expression of additional Wnt antagonists that cooperate with dnTcf7l2. Specific elimination of dnTcf7l2 in Xenopus results in headless embryos, a phenotype consistent with a fundamental role for this regulator in forebrain development.The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway has been extensively studied in neuronal function and morphogenesis. However, the precise molecular mechanisms of PI3K activation and its downstream signalling in neurons remain elusive. Here, we report the identification of the Neuronal tYrosine-phosphorylated Adaptor for the PI 3-kinase (NYAP) family of phosphoproteins, which is composed of NYAP1, NYAP2, and Myosin16/NYAP3. The NYAPs are expressed predominantly in developing neurons. Upon stimulation with Contactin5, the NYAPs are tyrosine phosphorylated by Fyn. Phosphorylated NYAPs interact with PI3K p85 and activate PI3K, Akt, and Rac1. Moreover, the NYAPs interact with the WAVE1 complex which mediates remodelling of the actin cytoskeleton after activation by PI3K-produced PIP(3) and Rac1. By simultaneously interacting with PI3K and the WAVE1 complex, the NYAPs bridge a PI3K-WAVE1 association. Disruption of the NYAP genes in mice affects brain size and neurite elongation. In conclusion, the NYAPs activate PI3K and concomitantly recruit the downstream effector WAVE complex to the close vicinity of PI3K and regulate neuronal morphogenesis.Recurrent chromosomal translocations involving the mixed lineage leukaemia (MLL) gene initiate aggressive forms of leukaemia, which are often refractory to conventional therapies. Many MLL-fusion partners are members of the super elongation complex (SEC), a critical regulator of transcriptional elongation, suggesting that aberrant control of this process has an important role in leukaemia induction. Here we use a global proteomic strategy to demonstrate that MLL fusions, as part of SEC and the polymerase-associated factor complex (PAFc), are associated with the BET family of acetyl-lysine recognizing, chromatin \'adaptor\' proteins. These data provided the basis for therapeutic intervention in MLL-fusion leukaemia, via the displacement of the BET family of proteins from chromatin. We show that a novel small molecule inhibitor of the BET family, GSK1210151A (I-BET151), has profound efficacy against human and murine MLL-fusion leukaemic cell lines, through the induction of early cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. I-BET151 treatment in two human leukaemia cell lines with different MLL fusions alters the expression of a common set of genes whose function may account for these phenotypic changes. The mode of action of I-BET151 is, at least in part, due to the inhibition of transcription at key genes (BCL2, C-MYC and CDK6) through the displacement of BRD3/4, PAFc and SEC components from chromatin. In vivo studies indicate that I-BET151 has significant therapeutic value, providing survival benefit in two distinct mouse models of murine MLL-AF9 and human MLL-AF4 leukaemia. Finally, the efficacy of I-BET151 against human leukaemia stem cells is demonstrated, providing further evidence of its potent therapeutic potential. These findings establish the displacement of BET proteins from chromatin as a promising epigenetic therapy for these aggressive leukaemias.Cardiomyocyte contraction and relaxation are controlled by Ca(2+) handling, which can be regulated to meet demand. Indeed, major reduction in sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) function in mice with Serca2 knockout (KO) is compensated by enhanced plasmalemmal Ca(2+) fluxes. Here we investigate whether altered Ca(2+) fluxes are facilitated by reorganization of cardiomyocyte ultrastructure. Hearts were fixed for electron microscopy and enzymatically dissociated for confocal microscopy and electrophysiology. SR relative surface area and volume densities were reduced by 63% and 76%, indicating marked loss and collapse of the free SR in KO. Although overall cardiomyocyte dimensions were unaltered, total surface area was increased. This resulted from increased T-tubule density, as revealed by confocal images. Fourier analysis indicated a maintained organization of transverse T-tubules but an increased presence of longitudinal T-tubules. This demonstrates a remarkable plasticity of the tubular system in the adult myocardium. Immunocytochemical data showed that the newly grown longitudinal T-tubules contained Na(+)/Ca(2+)-exchanger proximal to ryanodine receptors in the SR but did not contain Ca(2+)-channels. Ca(2+) measurements demonstrated a switch from SR-driven to Ca(2+) influx-driven Ca(2+) transients in KO. Still, SR Ca(2+) release constituted 20% of the Ca(2+) transient in KO. Mathematical modeling suggested that Ca(2+) influx via Na(+)/Ca(2+)-exchange in longitudinal T-tubules triggers release from apposing ryanodine receptors in KO, partially compensating for reduced SERCA by allowing for local Ca(2+) release near the myofilaments. T-tubule proliferation occurs without loss of the original ordered transverse orientation and thus constitutes the basis for compensation of the declining SR function without structural disarrangement.Packaging of proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum into COPII vesicles is essential for secretion. In cells, most COPII vesicles are approximately 60-80 nm in diameter, yet some must increase their size to accommodate 300-400 nm procollagen fibres or chylomicrons. Impaired COPII function results in collagen deposition defects, cranio-lenticulo-sutural dysplasia, or chylomicron retention disease, but mechanisms to enlarge COPII coats have remained elusive. Here, we identified the ubiquitin ligase CUL3-KLHL12 as a regulator of COPII coat formation. CUL3-KLHL12 catalyses the monoubiquitylation of the COPII-component SEC31 and drives the assembly of large COPII coats. As a result, ubiquitylation by CUL3-KLHL12 is essential for collagen export, yet less important for the transport of small cargo. We conclude that monoubiquitylation controls the size and function of a vesicle coat.Dual immunoglobulin (Ig) domain-containing adhesion molecule (DICAM) is involved in cell-cell adhesion through a heterophilic interaction with alphaVbeta3 integrin, which suggests that DICAM may participate in osteoclast differentiation. DICAM was localized in the plasma membrane of RAW264.7 and THP-1 cells, and its expression gradually increased during osteoclastogenesis in mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) treated with receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL) and macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF). Forced expression of DICAM in BMMs and RAW264.7 cells blocked the generation of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP)-positive osteoclasts. Conversely, knockdown of DICAM by small hairpin RNA (shRNA) increased osteoclast formation in RAW264.7 cells. DICAM-mediated suppression of osteoclast differentiation was in part due to the inhibition of the p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway, which was corroborated by a decrease in the expression of c-Fos and nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT)c1. Mechanistically, DICAM directly interacted with integrin beta3, which inhibited heterodimerization between integrin alphaV and beta3. Exogenous expression of integrin beta3 or high-dose M-CSF rescued DICAM-mediated inhibition of osteoclastogenesis, suggesting crosstalk between the integrin beta3 and c-Fms pathways. Finally, recombinant DICAM ectodomain suppressed the RANKL- and M-CSF-induced osteoclastogenesis of BMMs. Collectively, these results indicate that DICAM acts as a negative regulator of osteoclast differentiation by suppressing the integrin alphaVbeta3 pathway.Some anti-cancer drugs, including those that alter microtubule dynamics target mitotic cells and induce apoptosis in some cell types. However, such drugs elicit protective responses in other cell types allowing cells to escape from drug-induced mitotic inhibition. Cells with a faulty protective mechanism undergo defective mitosis, leading to genome instability. Brd4 is a double bromodomain protein that remains on chromosomes during mitosis. However, Brd4 is released from mitotic chromosomes when cells are exposed to anti-mitotic drugs including nocodazole. Neither the mechanisms, nor the biological significance of drug-induced Brd4 release has been fully understood. We found that deletion of the internal C-terminal region abolished nocodazole induced Brd4 release from mouse P19 cells. Furthermore, cells expressing truncated Brd4, unable to dissociate from chromosomes were blocked from mitotic progression and failed to complete cell division. We also found that pharmacological and peptide inhibitors of the c-jun-N-terminal kinases (JNK) pathway, but not inhibitors of other MAP kinases, prevented release of Brd4 from chromosomes. The JNK inhibitor that blocked Brd4 release also blocked mitotic progression. Further supporting the role of JNK in Brd4 release, JNK2-/- embryonic fibroblasts were defective in Brd4 release and sustained greater inhibition of cell growth after nocodazole treatment. In sum, activation of JNK pathway triggers release of Brd4 from chromosomes upon nocodazole treatment, which mediates a protective response designed to minimize drug-induced mitotic stress.Haploinsufficiency of RAI1 results in Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS), a disorder characterized by intellectual disability, multiple congenital anomalies, obesity, neurobehavioral abnormalities, and a disrupted circadian sleep-wake pattern. An inverted melatonin rhythm (i.e., melatonin peaks during the day instead of at night) and associated sleep-phase disturbances in individuals with SMS, as well as a short-period circadian rhythm in mice with a chromosomal deletion of Rai1, support SMS as a circadian-rhythm-dysfunction disorder. However, the molecular cause of the circadian defect in SMS has not been described. The circadian oscillator temporally orchestrates metabolism, physiology, and behavior largely through transcriptional modulation. Data support RAI1 as a transcriptional regulator, but the genes it might regulate are largely unknown. Investigation into the role that RAI1 plays in the regulation of gene transcription and circadian maintenance revealed that RAI1 regulates the transcription of circadian locomotor output cycles kaput (CLOCK), a key component of the mammalian circadian oscillator that transcriptionally regulates many critical circadian genes. Data further show that haploinsufficiency of RAI1 and Rai1 in SMS fibroblasts and the mouse hypothalamus, respectively, results in the transcriptional dysregulation of the circadian clock and causes altered expression and regulation of multiple circadian genes, including PER2, PER3, CRY1, BMAL1, and others. These data suggest that heterozygous mutation of RAI1 and Rai1 leads to a disrupted circadian rhythm and thus results in an abnormal sleep-wake cycle, which can contribute to an abnormal feeding pattern and dependent cognitive performance. Finally, we conclude that RAI1 is a positive transcriptional regulator of CLOCK, pinpointing a novel and important role for this gene in the circadian oscillator.Heterochromatin serves important functions, protecting genome integrity and stabilizing gene expression programs. Although the Suv39h methyltransferases (KMTs) are known to ensure pericentric H3K9me3 methylation, the mechanisms that initiate and maintain mammalian heterochromatin organization remain elusive. We developed a biochemical assay and used in vivo analyses in mouse embryonic fibroblasts to identify Prdm3 and Prdm16 as redundant H3K9me1-specific KMTs that direct cytoplasmic H3K9me1 methylation. The H3K9me1 is converted in the nucleus to H3K9me3 by the Suv39h enzymes to reinforce heterochromatin. Simultaneous depletion of Prdm3 and Prdm16 abrogates H3K9me1 methylation, prevents Suv39h-dependent H3K9me3 trimethylation, and derepresses major satellite transcription. Most strikingly, DNA-FISH and electron microscopy reveal that combined impairment of Prdm3 and Prdm16 results in disintegration of heterochromatic foci and disruption of the nuclear lamina. Our data identify Prdm3 and Prdm16 as H3K9me1 methyltransferases and expose a functional framework in which anchoring to the nuclear periphery helps maintain the integrity of mammalian heterochromatin.Chromatin-remodeling enzymes play essential roles in many biological processes, including gene expression, DNA replication and repair, and cell division. Although one such complex, SWI/SNF, has been extensively studied, new discoveries are still being made. Here, we review SWI/SNF biochemistry; highlight recent genomic and proteomic advances; and address the role of SWI/SNF in human diseases, including cancer and viral infections. These studies have greatly increased our understanding of complex nuclear processes.In response to severe injury, adult skeletal muscle exhibits a remarkable regenerative capacity due to a resident muscle stem/progenitor cell population. While a number of factors are expressed in the muscle progenitor cell (MPC) population, the molecular networks that govern this cell population remain an area of active investigation. In this study, utilizing knockdown techniques and overexpression of Foxk1 in the myogenic lineage, we observed dysregulation of Foxo and Mef2 downstream targets. Utilizing an array of technologies, we establish that Foxk1 represses the transcriptional activity of Foxo4 and Mef2 and physically interacts with Foxo4 and Mef2, thus promoting MPC proliferation and antagonizing the myogenic lineage differentiation program, respectively. Correspondingly, knockdown of Foxk1 in C2C12 myoblasts results in cell cycle arrest, and Foxk1 overexpression in C2C12CAR myoblasts retards muscle differentiation. Collectively, we have established that Foxk1 promotes MPC proliferation by repressing Foxo4 transcriptional activity and inhibits myogenic differentiation by repressing Mef2 activity. These studies enhance our understanding of the transcriptional networks that regulate the MPC population and muscle regeneration.DYRKs (dual specificity, tyrosine phosphorylation regulated kinases) and CLKs (cdc2-like kinases) are implicated in the onset and development of Alzheimer\'s disease and Down syndrome. The marine sponge alkaloid leucettamine B was recently identified as an inhibitor of DYRKs/CLKs. Synthesis of analogues (leucettines) led to an optimized product, leucettine L41. Leucettines were cocrystallized with DYRK1A, DYRK2, CLK3, PIM1, and GSK-3beta. The selectivity of L41 was studied by activity and interaction assays of recombinant kinases and affinity chromatography and competition affinity assays. These approaches revealed unexpected potential secondary targets such as CK2, SLK, and the lipid kinase PIKfyve/Vac14/Fig4. L41 displayed neuroprotective effects on glutamate-induced HT22 cell death. L41 also reduced amyloid precursor protein-induced cell death in cultured rat brain slices. The unusual multitarget selectivity of leucettines may account for their neuroprotective effects. This family of kinase inhibitors deserves further optimization as potential therapeutics against neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer\'s disease.Recruitment of dynein motors to the nuclear surface is an essential step for nucleus-centrosome coupling in prophase. In cultured human cells, this dynein pool is anchored to nuclear pore complexes through RanBP2-Bicaudal D2 (BICD2) and Nup133- centromere protein F (CENP-F) networks. We previously reported that the asunder (asun) gene is required in Drosophila spermatocytes for perinuclear dynein localization and nucleus-centrosome coupling at G2/M of male meiosis. We show here that male germline expression of mammalian Asunder (ASUN) protein rescues asun flies, demonstrating evolutionary conservation of function. In cultured human cells, we find that ASUN down-regulation causes reduction of perinuclear dynein in prophase of mitosis. Additional defects after loss of ASUN include nucleus-centrosome uncoupling, abnormal spindles, and multinucleation. Coimmunoprecipitation and overlapping localization patterns of ASUN and lissencephaly 1 (LIS1), a dynein adaptor, suggest that ASUN interacts with dynein in the cytoplasm via LIS1. Our data indicate that ASUN controls dynein localization via a mechanism distinct from that of either BICD2 or CENP-F. We present a model in which ASUN promotes perinuclear enrichment of dynein at G2/M that facilitates BICD2- and CENP-F-mediated anchoring of dynein to nuclear pore complexes.Protein function is regulated by diverse posttranslational modifications. The mitochondrial sirtuin SIRT5 removes malonyl and succinyl moieties from target lysines. The spectrum of protein substrates subject to these modifications is unknown. We report systematic profiling of the mammalian succinylome, identifying 2,565 succinylation sites on 779 proteins. Most of these do not overlap with acetylation sites, suggesting differential regulation of succinylation and acetylation. Our analysis reveals potential impacts of lysine succinylation on enzymes involved in mitochondrial metabolism; e.g., amino acid degradation, the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) cycle, and fatty acid metabolism. Lysine succinylation is also present on cytosolic and nuclear proteins; indeed, we show that a substantial fraction of SIRT5 is extramitochondrial. SIRT5 represses biochemical activity of, and cellular respiration through, two protein complexes identified in our analysis, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and succinate dehydrogenase. Our data reveal widespread roles for lysine succinylation in regulating metabolism and potentially other cellular functions. We previously showed that Rab13 and its effector protein, junctional Rab13-binding protein (JRAB)/molecules interacting with CasL-like 2 (MICAL-L2), regulate junctional development by modulating cell adhesion molecule transport and actin cytoskeletal reorganization in epithelial cells. Here, we investigated how JRAB regulates reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton in NIH3T3 fibroblasts, in an attempt to obtain novel insights into the mechanism of JRAB action. To this end, we expressed mutant proteins that adopt a constitutively open or closed state and then examined effect on cellular morphology of the resulting actin cytoskeletal reorganization. Expression of the JRABDeltaCT mutant (constitutively \'closed\' state) induced stress fibers, whereas expression of the JRABDeltaCC mutant (constitutively \'open\' state) caused cell spreading with membrane ruffles. Next, we identified the proteins involved in JRAB-induced rearrangement of actin cytoskeleton leading to morphological changes. In NIH3T3 cells expressing HA-JRABDeltaCC, filamin, an actin cross-linking protein, coimmunoprecipitated with HA-JRABDeltaCC. Expression of ASB2 induced degradation of all three filamin isoforms and inhibited the JRABDeltaCC-induced cell spreading. Consistent with our previous results, actinin-1/-4 were also immunoprecipitated with HA-JRABDeltaCC. However, actinin-1/-4 have no effect on the cell spreading regulated by JRABDeltaCC. These data suggest that JRAB contributes to the rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton during cell spreading via filamins.Stable Foxp3 expression is required for the development of functional regulatory T (Treg) cells. Here, we demonstrate that the expression of the transcription factor Foxp3 can be regulated through the polyubiquitination of multiple lysine residues, resulting in proteasome-mediated degradation. Expression of the deubiquitinase (DUB) USP7 was found to be upregulated and active in Treg cells, being associated with Foxp3 in the nucleus. Ectopic expression of USP7 decreased Foxp3 polyubiquitination and increased Foxp3 expression. Conversely, either treatment with DUB inhibitor or USP7 knockdown decreased endogenous Foxp3 protein expression and decreased Treg-cell-mediated suppression in vitro. Furthermore, in a murine adoptive-transfer-induced colitis model, either inhibition of DUB activity or USP7 knockdown in Treg cells abrogated their ability to resolve inflammation in vivo. Our data reveal a molecular mechanism in which rapid temporal control of Foxp3 expression in Treg cells can be regulated by USP7, thereby modulating Treg cell numbers and function. Autophagy degrades cytoplasmic proteins and organelles to recycle cellular components that are required for cell survival and tissue homeostasis. However, it is not clear how autophagy is regulated in mammalian cells. WASH (Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) and SCAR homologue) plays an essential role in endosomal sorting through facilitating tubule fission via Arp2/3 activation. Here, we demonstrate a novel function of WASH in modulation of autophagy. We show that WASH deficiency causes early embryonic lethality and extensive autophagy of mouse embryos. WASH inhibits vacuolar protein sorting (Vps)34 kinase activity and autophagy induction. We identified that WASH is a new interactor of Beclin 1. Beclin 1 is ubiquitinated at lysine 437 through lysine 63 linkage in cells undergoing autophagy. Ambra1 is an E3 ligase for lysine 63-linked ubiquitination of Beclin 1 that is required for starvation-induced autophagy. The lysine 437 ubiquitination of Beclin 1 enhances the association with Vps34 to promote Vps34 activity. WASH can suppress Beclin 1 ubiquitination to inactivate Vps34 activity leading to suppression of autophagy. Nutrient deprivation is a stimulus shared by both autophagy and the formation of primary cilia. The recently discovered role of primary cilia in nutrient sensing and signalling motivated us to explore the possible functional interactions between this signalling hub and autophagy. Here we show that part of the molecular machinery involved in ciliogenesis also participates in the early steps of the autophagic process. Signalling from the cilia, such as that from the Hedgehog pathway, induces autophagy by acting directly on essential autophagy-related proteins strategically located in the base of the cilium by ciliary trafficking proteins. Whereas abrogation of ciliogenesis partially inhibits autophagy, blockage of autophagy enhances primary cilia growth and cilia-associated signalling during normal nutritional conditions. We propose that basal autophagy regulates ciliary growth through the degradation of proteins required for intraflagellar transport. Compromised ability to activate the autophagic response may underlie some common ciliopathies. Protein methylation is a common posttranslational modification that mostly occurs on arginine and lysine residues. Arginine methylation has been reported to regulate RNA processing, gene transcription, DNA damage repair, protein translocation, and signal transduction. Lysine methylation is best known to regulate histone function and is involved in epigenetic regulation of gene transcription. To better study protein methylation, we have developed highly specific antibodies against monomethyl arginine; asymmetric dimethyl arginine; and monomethyl, dimethyl, and trimethyl lysine motifs. These antibodies were used to perform immunoaffinity purification of methyl peptides followed by LC-MS/MS analysis to identify and quantify arginine and lysine methylation sites in several model studies. Overall, we identified over 1000 arginine methylation sites in human cell line and mouse tissues, and ~160 lysine methylation sites in human cell line HCT116. The number of methylation sites identified in this study exceeds those found in the literature to date. Detailed analysis of arginine-methylated proteins observed in mouse brain compared with those found in mouse embryo shows a tissue-specific distribution of arginine methylation, and extends the types of proteins that are known to be arginine methylated to include many new protein types. Many arginine-methylated proteins that we identified from the brain, including receptors, ion channels, transporters, and vesicle proteins, are involved in synaptic transmission, whereas the most abundant methylated proteins identified from mouse embryo are transcriptional regulators and RNA processing proteins. Mutations in SHANK3 and large duplications of the region spanning SHANK3 both cause a spectrum of neuropsychiatric disorders, indicating that proper SHANK3 dosage is critical for normal brain function. However, SHANK3 overexpression per se has not been established as a cause of human disorders because 22q13 duplications involve several genes. Here we report that Shank3 transgenic mice modelling a human SHANK3 duplication exhibit manic-like behaviour and seizures consistent with synaptic excitatory/inhibitory imbalance. We also identified two patients with hyperkinetic disorders carrying the smallest SHANK3-spanning duplications reported so far. These findings indicate that SHANK3 overexpression causes a hyperkinetic neuropsychiatric disorder. To probe the mechanism underlying the phenotype, we generated a Shank3 in vivo interactome and found that Shank3 directly interacts with the Arp2/3 complex to increase F-actin levels in Shank3 transgenic mice. The mood-stabilizing drug valproate, but not lithium, rescues the manic-like behaviour of Shank3 transgenic mice raising the possibility that this hyperkinetic disorder has a unique pharmacogenetic profile. Cyclophilin A (CyPA) is an important mediator in cardiovascular diseases. It possesses peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase activity (PPIase) and chaperone functions, which regulate protein folding, intracellular trafficking and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Platelet glycoprotein receptor alphaIIbbeta3 integrin activation is the common pathway for platelet activation. It was our objective to understand the mechanism by which CyPA-regulates alphaIIbbeta3 activation in platelets. Mice deficient for CyPA (CyPA-/-) had prolonged tail bleeding time compared to wild-type (WT) controls despite equivalent platelet numbers. In vitro studies revealed that CyPA-/- platelets exhibited dramatically decreased thrombin-induced platelet aggregation. In vivo, formation of occlusive thrombi following FeCl3 injury was also significantly impaired in CyPA-/- mice compared with WT-controls. Furthermore, CyPA deficiency inhibited flow-induced thrombus formation in vitro. Flow cytometry demonstrated that thrombin-induced ROS production and alphaIIbbeta3 activation were reduced in CyPA-/- platelets. Coimmunoprecipitation studies showed ROS-dependent increased association of CyPA and alphaIIbbeta3. This association was dependent upon the PPIase activity of CyPA. Significantly, fibrinogen-platelet binding, platelet spreading and cytoskeleton reorganisation were also altered in CyPA-/- platelets. Moreover, CyPA deficiency prevented thrombin-induced alphaIIbbeta3 and cytoskeleton association. In conclusion, CyPA is an important mediator in platelet function by regulation of alphaIIbbeta3 bidirectionalsignalling through increased ROS production and facilitating interaction between alphaIIbbeta3 and the cell cytoskeleton. Synchrony of the mammalian circadian clock is achieved by complex transcriptional and translational feedback loops centered on the BMAL1:CLOCK heterodimer. Modulation of circadian feedback loops is essential for maintaining rhythmicity, yet the role of transcriptional coactivators in driving BMAL1:CLOCK transcriptional networks is largely unexplored. Here, we show diurnal hepatic steroid receptor coactivator 2 (SRC-2) recruitment to the genome that extensively overlaps with the BMAL1 cistrome during the light phase, targeting genes that enrich for circadian and metabolic processes. Notably, SRC-2 ablation impairs wheel-running behavior, alters circadian gene expression in several peripheral tissues, alters the rhythmicity of the hepatic metabolome, and deregulates the synchronization of cell-autonomous metabolites. We identify SRC-2 as a potent coregulator of BMAL1:CLOCK and find that SRC-2 targets itself with BMAL1:CLOCK in a feedforward loop. Collectively, our data suggest that SRC-2 is a transcriptional coactivator of the BMAL1:CLOCK oscillators and establish SRC-2 as a critical positive regulator of the mammalian circadian clock. The rapid Ab responses observed after primary and secondary immunizations are mainly derived from marginal zone (MZ) and memory B cells, respectively, but it is largely unknown how these responses are negatively regulated. Several inhibitory receptors have been identified and their roles have been studied, but mainly on follicular B cells and much less so on MZ B, and never on memory B cells. gp49B is an Ig superfamily member that contains two ITIMs in its cytoplasmic tail, and it has been shown to negatively regulate mast cell, macrophage, and NK cell responses. In this study, we demonstrate that gp49B is preferentially expressed on memory and MZ B cells. We show that gp49B(-/-) mice produce more IgM after a primary immunization and more IgM and IgG1 after a secondary immunization than gp49B(+/+) mice in T cell-dependent immune responses. Memory and MZ B cells from gp49B(-/-) mice also produce more Abs upon in vitro stimulation with CD40 than those from gp49B(+/+) mice. The in vitro IgM production by MZ B cells from gp49B(+/+), but not gp49B(-/-), mice is suppressed by interaction with a putative gp49B ligand, the integrin alphavbeta3 heterodimer. In addition, gp49B(-/-) mice exhibited exaggerated IgE production in the memory recall response. These results suggest that plasma cell development from memory and MZ B cells, as well as subsequent Ab production, are suppressed via gp49B. In memory B cells, this suppression also prevents excessive IgE production, thus curtailing allergic diseases. WASH (Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) and SCAR homolog) was identified to function in endosomal sorting via Arp2/3 activation. We previously demonstrated that WASH is a new interactor of BECN1 and present in the BECN1-PIK3C3 complex with AMBRA1. The AMBRA1-DDB1-CUL4A complex is an E3 ligase for K63-linked ubiquitination of BECN1, which is required for starvation-induced autophagy. WASH suppresses autophagy by inhibition of BECN1 ubiquitination. However, how AMBRA1 is regulated during autophagy remains elusive. Here, we found that RNF2 associates with AMBRA1 to act as an E3 ligase to ubiquitinate AMBRA1 via K48 linkage. RNF2 mediates ubiquitination of AMBRA1 at lysine 45. Notably, RNF2 deficiency enhances autophagy induction. Upon autophagy induction, RNF2 potentiates AMBRA1 degradation with the help of WASH. WASH deficiency impairs the association of RNF2 with AMBRA1 to impede AMBRA1 degradation. Our findings reveal another novel layer of regulation of autophagy through WASH recruitment of RNF2 for AMBRA1 degradation leading to downregulation of autophagy. Interferon gamma (IFNgamma) promotes cell division of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) without affecting the total HSC number. We postulated that IFNgamma stimulates differentiation of HSCs as part of the innate immune response. Here, we report that type II interferon signaling is required, both at baseline and during an animal model of LCMV infection, to maintain normal myeloid development. By separately evaluating myeloid-biased and lymphoid-biased HSC subtypes, we found that myeloid-biased HSCs express higher levels of IFNgamma receptor and are specifically activated to divide after recombinant IFNgamma exposure in vivo. While both HSC subtypes show increased expression of the transcription factor C/EBPbeta after infection, only the myeloid-biased HSCs are transiently depleted from the marrow during the type II interferon-mediated immune response to Mycobacterium avium infection, as measured both functionally and phenotypically. These findings indicate that IFNgamma selectively permits differentiation of myeloid-biased HSCs during an innate immune response to infection. This represents the first report of a context and a mechanism for discriminate utilization of the alternate HSC subtypes. Terminal differentiation, at the expense of self-renewal, may compromise HSC populations during states of chronic inflammation.Damaged mitochondria are eliminated by mitophagy, a selective form of autophagy whose dysfunction associates with neurodegenerative diseases. PINK1, PARKIN and p62/SQTMS1 have been shown to regulate mitophagy, leaving hitherto ill-defined the contribution by key players in \'general\' autophagy. In basal conditions, a pool of AMBRA1 - an upstream autophagy regulator and a PARKIN interactor - is present at the mitochondria, where its pro-autophagic activity is inhibited by Bcl-2. Here we show that, upon mitophagy induction, AMBRA1 binds the autophagosome adapter LC3 through a LIR (LC3 interacting region) motif, this interaction being crucial for regulating both canonical PARKIN-dependent and -independent mitochondrial clearance. Moreover, forcing AMBRA1 localization to the outer mitochondrial membrane unleashes a massive PARKIN- and p62-independent but LC3-dependent mitophagy. These results highlight a novel role for AMBRA1 as a powerful mitophagy regulator, through both canonical or noncanonical pathways.The gene trap method for embryonic stem cells is an efficient method for identifying new genes that are involved in development. Using this method, we identified a novel gene called helicase family gene related to gastrulation (helG). Helicase family proteins regulate many systems in the body that are related to cell survival. HelG encodes a protein of 137 kDa, which contains a DExH helicase motif that is now named DHX30. HelG is strongly expressed in neural cells (ie, in the headfold, neural plate, neural tube, and brain) and somites during embryogenesis. Growing homozygous mutant embryos have neither differentiated somites nor brains. In these mutants, development was retarded by embryonic day 7.5 (E7.5), and the mutants died at E9.5. After the purification of HelG, an untwisting experiment was performed to confirm the helicase activity of HelG for DNA in vitro. We report for the first time that a helicase family gene is required for differentiation during embryogenesis; this gene might interact with polynucleotides to regulate some genes that are important for early development and has a structure similar to that of a human DExH box helicase. L-type calcium (Ca(2+)) currents conducted by voltage-gated Ca(2+) channel CaV1.2 initiate excitation-contraction coupling in cardiomyocytes. Upon activation of beta-adrenergic receptors, phosphorylation of CaV1.2 channels by cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) increases channel activity, thereby allowing more Ca(2+) entry into the cell, which leads to more forceful contraction. In vitro reconstitution studies and in vivo proteomics analysis have revealed that Ser-1700 is a key site of phosphorylation mediating this effect, but the functional role of this amino acid residue in regulation in vivo has remained uncertain. Here we have studied the regulation of calcium current and cell contraction of cardiomyocytes in vitro and cardiac function and homeostasis in vivo in a mouse line expressing the mutation Ser-1700-Ala in the CaV1.2 channel. We found that preventing phosphorylation at this site decreased the basal L-type CaV1.2 current in both neonatal and adult cardiomyocytes. In addition, the incremental increase elicited by isoproterenol was abolished in neonatal cardiomyocytes and was substantially reduced in young adult myocytes. In contrast, cellular contractility was only moderately reduced compared with wild type, suggesting a greater reserve of contractile function and/or recruitment of compensatory mechanisms. Mutant mice develop cardiac hypertrophy by the age of 3-4 mo, and maximal stress-induced exercise tolerance is reduced, indicating impaired physiological regulation in the fight-or-flight response. Our results demonstrate that phosphorylation at Ser-1700 alone is essential to maintain basal Ca(2+) current and regulation by beta-adrenergic activation. As a consequence, blocking PKA phosphorylation at this site impairs cardiovascular physiology in vivo, leading to reduced exercise capacity in the fight-or-flight response and development of cardiac hypertrophy. Inhibition of a main regulator of cell metabolism, the protein kinase mTOR, induces autophagy and inhibits cell proliferation. However, the molecular pathways involved in the cross-talk between these two mTOR-dependent cell processes are largely unknown. Here we show that the scaffold protein AMBRA1, a member of the autophagy signalling network and a downstream target of mTOR, regulates cell proliferation by facilitating the dephosphorylation and degradation of the proto-oncogene c-Myc. We found that AMBRA1 favours the interaction between c-Myc and its phosphatase PP2A and that, when mTOR is inhibited, it enhances PP2A activity on this specific target, thereby reducing the cell division rate. As expected, such a de-regulation of c-Myc correlates with increased tumorigenesis in AMBRA1-defective systems, thus supporting a role for AMBRA1 as a haploinsufficient tumour suppressor gene. Pten controls a signaling axis that is implicated to regulate cell proliferation, growth, survival, migration, and metabolism. The molecular mechanisms underlying the specificity of Pten responses to such diverse cellular functions are currently poorly understood. Here we report the control of Pten activity and signaling specificity during the cell cycle by Ndfip1 regulation of Pten spatial distribution. Genetic deletion of Ndfip1 resulted in a loss of Pten nuclear compartmentalization and increased cell proliferation, despite cytoplasmic Pten remaining active in regulating PI3K/Akt signaling. Cells lacking nuclear Pten were found to have dysregulated levels of Plk1 and cyclin D1 that could drive cell proliferation. In vivo, transgene expression of Ndfip1 in the developing brain increased nuclear Pten and lengthened the cell cycle of neuronal progenitors, resulting in microencephaly. Our results show that local partitioning of Pten from the cytoplasm to the nucleus represents a key mechanism contributing to the specificity of Pten signaling during cell proliferation.SUMO chains act as stress-induced degradation tags or repair factor-recruiting signals at DNA lesions. Although E1 activating, E2 conjugating and E3 ligating enzymes efficiently assemble SUMO chains, specific chain-elongation mechanisms are unknown. E4 elongases are specialized E3 ligases that extend a chain but are inefficient in the initial conjugation of the modifier. We identified ZNF451, a representative member of a new class of SUMO2 and SUMO3 (SUMO2/3)-specific enzymes that execute catalysis via a tandem SUMO-interaction motif (SIM) region. One SIM positions the donor SUMO while a second SIM binds SUMO on the back side of the E2 enzyme. This tandem-SIM region is sufficient to extend a back side-anchored SUMO chain (E4 elongase activity), whereas efficient chain initiation also requires a zinc-finger region to recruit the initial acceptor SUMO (E3 ligase activity). Finally, we describe four human proteins sharing E4 elongase activities and their function in stress-induced SUMO2/3 conjugation. Over the past 4 years, nearly 100 exome sequencing studies have revealed the high frequency of mutations in the genes encoding the subunits of ATP-dependent chromatin remodelers in human cancer. Most of these mutations are within the genes encoding subunits of the BAF (Brg/Brahma-associated factors) or mSWI/SNF complex, which is one of two dozen predicted ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complexes in mammals. Considering BAF complexes as a single entity, the 15 subunits encoded by 29 genes are mutated in >20% of human cancer, across a broad range of tumor types. These observations demonstrate that there is little redundancy in the oncogenic function of BAF complexes with the other remodeling complexes, underscoring their unique roles. Several important conclusions emerge from these genomic data: specific subunits appear to be mutated in specific cancers, highlighting tissue-specific protective roles; mutations can function as tumor suppressors or oncogenes; mutations can be homozygous or, more commonly, heterozygous, implying their dosage-sensitive roles in an unknown yet fundamental process used to suppress the genesis of cancer. These new human genetic findings paired with biochemical studies are challenging old ideas on how chromatin remodeling complexes function, generating new hypotheses with respect to their normal and oncogenic mechanisms and highlighting potential avenues for therapeutic intervention in human cancer. The periosteum contributes to bone repair and maintenance of cortical bone mass. In contrast to the understanding of bone development within the epiphyseal growth plate, factors that regulate periosteal osteogenesis have not been studied as intensively. Osteofibrous dysplasia (OFD) is a congenital disorder of osteogenesis and is typically sporadic and characterized by radiolucent lesions affecting the cortical bone immediately under the periosteum of the tibia and fibula. We identified germline mutations in MET, encoding a receptor tyrosine kinase, that segregate with an autosomal-dominant form of OFD in three families and a mutation in a fourth affected subject from a simplex family and with bilateral disease. Mutations identified in all families with dominant inheritance and in the one simplex subject with bilateral disease abolished the splice inclusion of exon 14 in MET transcripts, which resulted in a MET receptor (MET(Delta14)) lacking a cytoplasmic juxtamembrane domain. Splice exclusion of this domain occurs during normal embryonic development, and forced induction of this exon-exclusion event retarded osteoblastic differentiation in vitro and inhibited bone-matrix mineralization. In an additional subject with unilateral OFD, we identified a somatic MET mutation, also affecting exon 14, that substituted a tyrosine residue critical for MET receptor turnover and, as in the case of the MET(Delta14) mutations, had a stabilizing effect on the mature protein. Taken together, these data show that aberrant MET regulation via the juxtamembrane domain subverts core MET receptor functions that regulate osteogenesis within cortical diaphyseal bone.Trafficking and biophysical properties of AMPA receptors (AMPARs) in the brain depend on interactions with associated proteins. We identify Shisa6, a single transmembrane protein, as a stable and directly interacting bona fide AMPAR auxiliary subunit. Shisa6 is enriched at hippocampal postsynaptic membranes and co-localizes with AMPARs. The Shisa6 C-terminus harbours a PDZ domain ligand that binds to PSD-95, constraining mobility of AMPARs in the plasma membrane and confining them to postsynaptic densities. Shisa6 expressed in HEK293 cells alters GluA1- and GluA2-mediated currents by prolonging decay times and decreasing the extent of AMPAR desensitization, while slowing the rate of recovery from desensitization. Using gene deletion, we show that Shisa6 increases rise and decay times of hippocampal CA1 miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs). Shisa6-containing AMPARs show prominent sustained currents, indicating protection from full desensitization. Accordingly, Shisa6 prevents synaptically trapped AMPARs from depression at high-frequency synaptic transmission. Mammalian Cryptochromes, CRY1 and CRY2, function as principal regulators of a transcription-translation-based negative feedback loop underlying the mammalian circadian clockwork. An F-box protein, FBXL3, promotes ubiquitination and degradation of CRYs, while FBXL21, the closest paralog of FBXL3, ubiquitinates CRYs but leads to stabilization of CRYs. Fbxl3 knockout extremely lengthened the circadian period, and deletion of Fbxl21 gene in Fbxl3-deficient mice partially rescued the period-lengthening phenotype, suggesting a key role of CRY protein stability for maintenance of the circadian periodicity. Here, we employed a proteomics strategy to explore regulators for the protein stability of CRYs. We found that ubiquitin-specific protease 7 (USP7 also known as HAUSP) associates with CRY1 and CRY2 and stabilizes CRYs through deubiquitination. Treatment with USP7-specific inhibitor or Usp7 knockdown shortened the circadian period of the cellular rhythm. We identified another CRYs-interacting protein, TAR DNA binding protein 43 (TDP-43), an RNA-binding protein. TDP-43 stabilized CRY1 and CRY2, and its knockdown also shortened the circadian period in cultured cells. The present study identified USP7 and TDP-43 as the regulators of CRY1 and CRY2, underscoring the significance of the stability control process of CRY proteins for period determination in the mammalian circadian clockwork.Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is a devastating eye disease and an important cause of childhood blindness worldwide. In PCG, defects in the anterior chamber aqueous humor outflow structures of the eye result in elevated intraocular pressure (IOP); however, the genes and molecular mechanisms involved in the etiology of these defects have not been fully characterized. Previously, we observed PCG-like phenotypes in transgenic mice that lack functional angiopoietin-TEK signaling. Herein, we identified rare TEK variants in 10 of 189 unrelated PCG families and demonstrated that each mutation results in haploinsufficiency due to protein loss of function. Multiple cellular mechanisms were responsible for the loss of protein function resulting from individual TEK variants, including an absence of normal protein production, protein aggregate formation, enhanced proteasomal degradation, altered subcellular localization, and reduced responsiveness to ligand stimulation. Further, in mice, hemizygosity for Tek led to the formation of severely hypomorphic Schlemm\'s canal and trabecular meshwork, as well as elevated IOP, demonstrating that anterior chamber vascular development is sensitive to Tek gene dosage and the resulting decrease in angiopoietin-TEK signaling. Collectively, these results identify TEK mutations in patients with PCG that likely underlie disease and are transmitted in an autosomal dominant pattern with variable expressivity.Retrolinkin, a neuronal membrane protein, coordinates with endophilin A1 and mediates early endocytic trafficking and signal transduction of the ligand-receptor complex formed between brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its receptor, tropomyosin-related kinase B (TrkB), in dendrites of CNS neurons. Here we report that retrolinkin interacts with the CYFIP1/2 subunit of the WAVE1 complex, a member of the WASP/WAVE family of nucleation-promoting factors that binds and activates the Arp2/3 complex to promote branched actin polymerization. WAVE1, not N-WASP, is required for BDNF-induced TrkB endocytosis and dendrite outgrowth. Disruption of the interaction between retrolinkin and CYFIP1/2 impairs recruitment of WAVE1 to neuronal plasma membrane upon BDNF addition and blocks internalization of activated TrkB. We also show that WAVE1-mediated endocytosis of BDNF-activated TrkB is actin dependent and clathrin independent. These results not only reveal the mechanistic role of retrolinkin in BDNF-TrkB endocytosis, but also indicate that WASP/WAVE-dependent actin polymerization during endocytosis is regulated by cell type-specific and cargo-specific modulators.The transcription factor Nrf2 (NF-E2-related-factor 2) is essential for the oxidative and electrophilic stress responses. Keap1 (Kelch-like-ECH-associated-protein 1), an adaptor for a cullin-3 (Cul3)-based ubiquitin ligase, regulates Nrf2 activity through proteasomal degradation, and acts as a sensor for oxidative and electrophilic stresses. The Keap1-Cul3 complex is a critical regulator of the cellular Nrf2 level, and yet quantitative information regarding their endogenous intracellular concentrations in homeostatic conditions and during stress responses is unknown. We analyzed the absolute amounts of the Nrf2, Keap1, and Cul3 proteins in five murine cell lines by comparison with serial dilutions of purified recombinant protein standards in combination with quantitative immunoblot analyses. In the basal state, the amount of Nrf2 was maintained at lower levels than those of Keap1 and Cul3 proteins, whereas the electrophilic agent diethylmaleate dramatically increased Nrf2 to a level greater than that of Keap1 and Cul3, resulting in the accumulation of Nrf2 in the nucleus. In contrast, Keap1 and Cul3 did not display any changes in their abundance, subcellular localization, or interaction in response to electrophilic stimuli. Our results demonstrate that the regulation of the Nrf2 protein level during stress responses is mediated by the activity but not the composition of the Nrf2-Keap1-Cul3 complex.Gene regulatory networks are pivotal for many biological processes. In mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), the transcriptional network can be divided into three functionally distinct modules: Polycomb, Core, and Myc. The Polycomb module represses developmental genes, while the Myc module is associated with proliferative functions, and its mis-regulation is linked to cancer development. Here, we show that, in mESCs, the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2)-associated protein EPOP (Elongin BC and Polycomb Repressive Complex 2-associated protein; a.k.a. C17orf96, esPRC2p48, and E130012A19Rik) co-localizes at chromatin with members of the Myc and Polycomb module. EPOP interacts with the transcription elongation factor Elongin BC and the H2B deubiquitinase USP7 to modulate transcriptional processes in mESCs similar to MYC. EPOP is commonly upregulated in human cancer, and its loss impairs the proliferation of several human cancer cell lines. Our findings establish EPOP as a transcriptional modulator, which impacts both Polycomb and active gene transcription in mammalian cells.SET domain-containing proteins play a vital role in regulating gene expression during development through modifications in chromatin structure. Here we show that SET domain-containing 5 (Setd5) is divergently transcribed with Gt(ROSA26)Sor, is necessary for mammalian development, and interacts with the PAF1 co-transcriptional complex and other proteins. Setd5-deficient mouse embryos exhibit severe defects in neural tube formation, somitogenesis and cardiac development, have aberrant vasculogenesis in embryos, yolk sacs and placentas, and die between embryonic day 10.5 and 11.5. Setd5-deficient embryonic stem cells have impaired cellular proliferation, increased apoptosis, defective cell cycle progression, a diminished ability to differentiate into cardiomyocytes and greatly perturbed gene expression. SETD5 co-immunoprecipitates with multiple components of the PAF1 and histone deacetylase-containing NCoR complexes and is not solely required for major histone lysine methylation marks. In the absence of Setd5, histone acetylation is increased at transcription start sites and near downstream regions. These findings suggest that SETD5 functions in a manner similar to yeast Set3p and Drosophila UpSET, and that it is essential for regulating histone acetylation during gene transcription.Hypercontractility of arterial myocytes and enhanced vascular tone during diabetes are, in part, attributed to the effects of increased glucose (hyperglycemia) on L-type CaV1.2 channels. In murine arterial myocytes, kinase-dependent mechanisms mediate the increase in CaV1.2 activity in response to increased extracellular glucose. We identified a subpopulation of the CaV1.2 channel pore-forming subunit (alpha1C) within nanometer proximity of protein kinase A (PKA) at the sarcolemma of murine and human arterial myocytes. This arrangement depended upon scaffolding of PKA by an A-kinase anchoring protein 150 (AKAP150) in mice. Glucose-mediated increases in CaV1.2 channel activity were associated with PKA activity, leading to alpha1C phosphorylation at Ser1928 Compared to arteries from low-fat diet (LFD)-fed mice and nondiabetic patients, arteries from high-fat diet (HFD)-fed mice and from diabetic patients had increased Ser1928 phosphorylation and CaV1.2 activity. Arterial myocytes and arteries from mice lacking AKAP150 or expressing mutant AKAP150 unable to bind PKA did not exhibit increased Ser1928 phosphorylation and CaV1.2 current density in response to increased glucose or to HFD. Consistent with a functional role for Ser1928 phosphorylation, arterial myocytes and arteries from knockin mice expressing a CaV1.2 with Ser1928 mutated to alanine (S1928A) lacked glucose-mediated increases in CaV1.2 activity and vasoconstriction. Furthermore, the HFD-induced increases in CaV1.2 current density and myogenic tone were prevented in S1928A knockin mice. These findings reveal an essential role for alpha1C phosphorylation at Ser1928 in stimulating CaV1.2 channel activity and vasoconstriction by AKAP-targeted PKA upon exposure to increased glucose and in diabetes.Purpose: Mutations in LRIT3 lead to complete congenital stationary night blindness (cCSNB). Using a cCSNB mouse model lacking Lrit3 (nob6), we recently have shown that LRIT3 has a role in the correct localization of TRPM1 (transient receptor potential melastatin 1) to the dendritic tips of ON-bipolar cells (BCs), contacting both rod and cone photoreceptors. Furthermore, postsynaptic clustering of other mGluR6 cascade components is selectively eliminated at the dendritic tips of cone ON-BCs. The purpose of this study was to further define the role of LRIT3 in structural and functional organization of cone synapses. Methods: Exhaustive electroretinogram analysis was performed in a patient with LRIT3 mutations. Multielectrode array recordings were performed at the level of retinal ganglion cells in nob6 mice. Targeting of GluR1 and GluR5 at the dendritic tips of OFF-BCs in nob6 retinas was assessed by immunostaining and confocal microscopy. The ultrastructure of photoreceptor synapses was evaluated by electron microscopy in nob6 mice. Results: The patient with LRIT3 mutations had a selective ON-BC dysfunction with relatively preserved OFF-BC responses. In nob6 mice, complete lack of ON-pathway function with robust, yet altered signaling processing in OFF-pathways was detected. Consistent with these observations, molecules essential for the OFF-BC signaling were normally targeted to the synapse. Finally, synaptic contacts made by ON-BC but not OFF-BC neurons with the cone pedicles were disorganized without ultrastructural alterations in cone terminals, horizontal cell processes, or synaptic ribbons. Conclusions: These results suggest that LRIT3 is likely involved in coordination of the transsynaptic communication between cones and ON-BCs during synapse formation and function.Here, using mouse squamous cell carcinoma cells, we report a completely new function for the autophagy protein Ambra1 as the first described \'spatial rheostat\' controlling the Src/FAK pathway. Ambra1 regulates the targeting of active phospho-Src away from focal adhesions into autophagic structures that cancer cells use to survive adhesion stress. Ambra1 binds to both FAK and Src in cancer cells. When FAK is present, Ambra1 is recruited to focal adhesions, promoting FAK-regulated cancer cell direction-sensing and invasion. However, when Ambra1 cannot bind to FAK, abnormally high levels of phospho-Src and phospho-FAK accumulate at focal adhesions, positively regulating adhesion and invasive migration. Spatial control of active Src requires the trafficking proteins Dynactin one and IFITM3, which we identified as Ambra1 binding partners by interaction proteomics. We conclude that Ambra1 is a core component of an intracellular trafficking network linked to tight spatial control of active Src and FAK levels, and so crucially regulates their cancer-associated biological outputs.Metabolic reprogramming contributes to dynamic alteration of cell functions and characteristics. In T cells, TCR-mediated signaling evokes metabolic reprogramming and autophagy. AMBRA1 is known to serve in the facilitation of autophagy and quality control of mitochondria, but the role of AMBRA1 in T cell metabolic alteration is unknown. Here, we show that AMBRA1, but not ATG7, plays a role in TCR-mediated control of glycolytic factors and mitochondrial mass, while both AMBRA1 and ATG7 are required for autolysosome formation. Our results suggested that AMBRA1 is a core factor that controls both autophagy and metabolic regulation.Engagement of integrins by the extracellular matrix initiates signaling cascades that drive a variety of cellular functions, including neuronal migration and axonal pathfinding in the brain. Multiple lines of evidence link the ITGB3 gene encoding the integrin beta3 subunit with the serotonin (5-HT) system, likely via its modulation of the 5-HT transporter (SERT). The ITGB3 coding polymorphism Leu33Pro (rs5918, PlA2) produces hyperactive alphavbeta3 receptors that influence whole-blood 5-HT levels and may influence the risk for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Using a phenome-wide scan of psychiatric diagnoses, we found significant, male-specific associations between the Pro33 allele and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and ASDs. Here, we used knock-in (KI) mice expressing an Itgb3 variant that phenocopies the human Pro33 variant to elucidate the consequences of constitutively enhanced alphavbeta3 signaling to the 5-HT system in the brain. KI mice displayed deficits in multiple behaviors, including anxiety, repetitive, and social behaviors. Anatomical studies revealed a significant decrease in 5-HT synapses in the midbrain, accompanied by decreases in SERT activity and reduced localization of SERTs to integrin adhesion complexes in synapses of KI mice. Inhibition of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) rescued SERT function in synapses of KI mice, demonstrating that constitutive active FAK signaling downstream of the Pro32Pro33 integrin alphavbeta3 suppresses SERT activity. Our studies identify a complex regulation of 5-HT homeostasis and behaviors by integrin alphavbeta3, revealing an important role for integrins in modulating risk for neuropsychiatric disorders.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT The integrin beta3 Leu33Pro coding polymorphism has been associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) within a subgroup of patients with elevated blood 5-HT levels, linking integrin beta3, 5-HT, and ASD risk. We capitalized on these interactions to demonstrate that the Pro33 coding variation in the murine integrin beta3 recapitulates the sex-dependent neurochemical and behavioral attributes of ASD. Using state-of-the-art techniques, we show that presynaptic 5-HT function is altered in these mice, and that the localization of 5-HT transporters to specific compartments within the synapse, disrupted by the integrin beta3 Pro33 mutation, is critical for appropriate reuptake of 5-HT. Our studies provide fundamental insight into the genetic network regulating 5-HT neurotransmission in the CNS that is also associated with ASD risk.The tumor suppressors Tsc1 and Tsc2 form the tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), a regulator of mTOR activity. Tsc1 stabilizes Tsc2; however, the precise mechanism involved remains elusive. The molecular chaperone heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is an essential component of the cellular homeostatic machinery in eukaryotes. Here, we show that Tsc1 is a new co-chaperone for Hsp90 that inhibits its ATPase activity. The C-terminal domain of Tsc1 (998-1,164 aa) forms a homodimer and binds to both protomers of the Hsp90 middle domain. This ensures inhibition of both subunits of the Hsp90 dimer and prevents the activating co-chaperone Aha1 from binding the middle domain of Hsp90. Conversely, phosphorylation of Aha1-Y223 increases its affinity for Hsp90 and displaces Tsc1, thereby providing a mechanism for equilibrium between binding of these two co-chaperones to Hsp90. Our findings establish an active role for Tsc1 as a facilitator of Hsp90-mediated folding of kinase and non-kinase clients-including Tsc2-thereby preventing their ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation.Glutamatergic synapses rely on AMPA receptors (AMPARs) for fast synaptic transmission and plasticity. AMPAR auxiliary proteins regulate receptor trafficking, and modulate receptor mobility and its biophysical properties. The AMPAR auxiliary protein Shisa7 (CKAMP59) has been shown to interact with AMPARs in artificial expression systems, but it is unknown whether Shisa7 has a functional role in glutamatergic synapses. We show that Shisa7 physically interacts with synaptic AMPARs in mouse hippocampus. Shisa7 gene deletion resulted in faster AMPAR currents in CA1 synapses, without affecting its synaptic expression. Shisa7 KO mice showed reduced initiation and maintenance of long-term potentiation of glutamatergic synapses. In line with this, Shisa7 KO mice showed a specific deficit in contextual fear memory, both short-term and long-term after conditioning, whereas auditory fear memory and anxiety-related behavior were normal. Thus, Shisa7 is a bona-fide AMPAR modulatory protein affecting channel kinetics of AMPARs, necessary for synaptic hippocampal plasticity, and memory recall.As most of the mitochondrial proteome is encoded in the nucleus, mitochondrial functions critically depend on nuclear gene expression and bidirectional mito-nuclear communication. However, mitochondria-to-nucleus communication pathways in mammals are incompletely understood. Here, we identify G-Protein Pathway Suppressor 2 (GPS2) as a mediator of mitochondrial retrograde signaling and a transcriptional activator of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes. GPS2-regulated translocation from mitochondria to nucleus is essential for the transcriptional activation of a nuclear stress response to mitochondrial depolarization and for supporting basal mitochondrial biogenesis in differentiating adipocytes and brown adipose tissue (BAT) from mice. In the nucleus, GPS2 recruitment to target gene promoters regulates histone H3K9 demethylation and RNA POL2 activation through inhibition of Ubc13-mediated ubiquitination. These findings, together, reveal an additional layer of regulation of mitochondrial gene transcription, uncover a direct mitochondria-nuclear communication pathway, and indicate that GPS2 retrograde signaling is a key component of the mitochondrial stress response in mammals.Transcriptional regulation by chromatin is a highly dynamic process directed through the recruitment and coordinated action of epigenetic modifiers and readers of these modifications. Using an unbiased proteomic approach to find interactors of H3K36me3, a modification enriched on active chromatin, here we identify PWWP2A and HDAC2 among the top interactors. PWWP2A and its paralog PWWP2B form a stable complex with NuRD subunits MTA1/2/3:HDAC1/2:RBBP4/7, but not with MBD2/3, p66alpha/beta, and CHD3/4. PWWP2A competes with MBD3 for binding to MTA1, thus defining a new variant NuRD complex that is mutually exclusive with the MBD2/3 containing NuRD. In mESCs, PWWP2A/B is most enriched at highly transcribed genes. Loss of PWWP2A/B leads to increases in histone acetylation predominantly at highly expressed genes, accompanied by decreases in Pol II elongation. Collectively, these findings suggest a role for PWWP2A/B in regulating transcription through the fine-tuning of histone acetylation dynamics at actively transcribed genes.Chromatin structure and function is regulated by reader proteins recognizing histone modifications and/or histone variants. We recently identified that PWWP2A tightly binds to H2A.Z-containing nucleosomes and is involved in mitotic progression and cranial-facial development. Here, using in vitro assays, we show that distinct domains of PWWP2A mediate binding to free linker DNA as well as H3K36me3 nucleosomes. In vivo, PWWP2A strongly recognizes H2A.Z-containing regulatory regions and weakly binds H3K36me3-containing gene bodies. Further, PWWP2A binds to an MTA1-specific subcomplex of the NuRD complex (M1HR), which consists solely of MTA1, HDAC1, and RBBP4/7, and excludes CHD, GATAD2 and MBD proteins. Depletion of PWWP2A leads to an increase of acetylation levels on H3K27 as well as H2A.Z, presumably by impaired chromatin recruitment of M1HR. Thus, this study identifies PWWP2A as a complex chromatin-binding protein that serves to direct the deacetylase complex M1HR to H2A.Z-containing chromatin, thereby promoting changes in histone acetylation levels.Junctophilin-2 (JP2) is a structural protein required for normal excitation-contraction (E-C) coupling. After cardiac stress, JP2 is cleaved by the calcium ion-dependent protease calpain, which disrupts the E-C coupling ultrastructural machinery and drives heart failure progression. We found that stress-induced proteolysis of JP2 liberates an N-terminal fragment (JP2NT) that translocates to the nucleus, binds to genomic DNA, and controls expression of a spectrum of genes in cardiomyocytes. Transgenic overexpression of JP2NT in mice modifies the transcriptional profile, resulting in attenuated pathological remodeling in response to cardiac stress. Conversely, loss of nuclear JP2NT function accelerates stress-induced development of hypertrophy and heart failure in mutant mice. These data reveal a self-protective mechanism in failing cardiomyocytes that transduce mechanical information (E-C uncoupling) into salutary transcriptional reprogramming in the stressed heart.SETD5 gene mutations have been identified as a frequent cause of idiopathic intellectual disability. Here we show that Setd5-haploinsufficient mice present developmental defects such as abnormal brain-to-body weight ratios and neural crest defect-associated phenotypes. Furthermore, Setd5-mutant mice show impairments in cognitive tasks, enhanced long-term potentiation, delayed ontogenetic profile of ultrasonic vocalization, and behavioral inflexibility. Behavioral issues are accompanied by abnormal expression of postsynaptic density proteins previously associated with cognition. Our data additionally indicate that Setd5 regulates RNA polymerase II dynamics and gene transcription via its interaction with the Hdac3 and Paf1 complexes, findings potentially explaining the gene expression defects observed in Setd5-haploinsufficient mice. Our results emphasize the decisive role of Setd5 in a biological pathway found to be disrupted in humans with intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder.Regulatory T cells (Treg) are necessary to maintain immunological tolerance and are key players in the control of autoimmune disease susceptibility. Expression of the transcription factor FOXP3 is essential for differentiation of Treg cells and indispensable for their suppressive function. However, there is still a lack of knowledge about the mechanisms underlying its regulation. Here, we demonstrate that pro-autophagy protein AMBRA1 is also a key modulator of T cells, regulating the complex network that leads to human Treg differentiation and maintenance. Indeed, through its ability to interact with the phosphatase PP2A, AMBRA1 promotes the stability of the transcriptional activator FOXO3, which, in turn, triggers FOXP3 transcription. Furthermore, we found that AMBRA1 plays a significant role in vivo by regulating Treg cell induction in mouse models of both tumor growth and multiple sclerosis, thus highlighting the role of AMBRA1 in the control of immune homeostasis.SETD5, a gene linked to intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), is a member of the SET-domain family and encodes a putative histone methyltransferase (HMT). To date, the mechanism by which SETD5 haploinsufficiency causes ASD/ID remains an unanswered question. Setd5 is the highly conserved mouse homolog, and although the Setd5 null mouse is embryonic lethal, the heterozygote is viable. Morphological tracing and multielectrode array was used on cultured cortical neurons. MRI was conducted of adult mouse brains and immunohistochemistry of juvenile mouse brains. RNA-Seq was used to investigate gene expression in the developing cortex. Behavioral assays were conducted on adult mice. Setd5+/- cortical neurons displayed significantly reduced synaptic density and neuritic outgrowth in vitro, with corresponding decreases in network activity and synchrony by electrophysiology. A specific subpopulation of fetal Setd5+/- cortical neurons showed altered gene expression of neurodevelopment-related genes. Setd5+/- animals manifested several autism-like behaviors, including hyperactivity, cognitive deficit, and altered social interactions. Anatomical differences were observed in Setd5+/- adult brains, accompanied by a deficit of deep-layer cortical neurons in the developing brain. Our data converge on a picture of abnormal neurodevelopment driven by Setd5 haploinsufficiency, consistent with a highly penetrant risk factor.More than 2300 genes have been reported to be involved in spermatogenesis but the functional roles of most genes in male fertility remain to be elucidated. In this study, we explored the function of dipeptidase 3 (Dpep3), a gene predicted to be testis-specific, in male fertility of mice. We showed that Dpep3 is evolutionarily conserved in human and mouse along with other eutherians. Its mRNA was exclusively detected in testicular tissue and expressed in testes from 7 days postpartum. To further explore its role in male fertility, we generated Dpep3 knockout mice (Dpep3-/-) using the CRISPR/Cas9 technology and found that the male Dpep3-/- mice are fertile despite a significant reduction in sperm count. Histology of testis and progression of meiotic prophase I showed no obvious difference between wild-type and Dpep3-/- mice. All these findings indicate that Dpep3 is not essential for male fertility in mice. These findings will help other researchers to avoid research duplication, save their time and resources to focus on the genes that are indispensable for male fertility.Mutations in one SETD5 allele are genetic causes of intellectual disability and autistic spectrum disorders. However, the mechanisms by which SETD5 regulates brain development and function remain largely elusive. Herein, we found that Setd5 haploinsufficiency impairs the proliferative dynamics of neural progenitors and synaptic wiring of neurons, ultimately resulting in behavioral deficits in mice. Mechanistically, Setd5 inactivation in neural stem cells, zebrafish, and mice equally affects genome-wide levels of H3K36me3 on active gene bodies. Notably, we demonstrated that SETD5 directly deposits H3K36me3, which is essential to allow on-time RNA elongation dynamics. Hence, Setd5 gene loss leads to abnormal transcription, with impaired RNA maturation causing detrimental effects on gene integrity and splicing. These findings identify SETD5 as a fundamental epigenetic enzyme controlling the transcriptional landscape in neural progenitors and their derivatives and illuminate the molecular events that connect epigenetic defects with neuronal dysfunctions at the basis of related human diseases.A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in a noncoding region of C9orf72 is the most common genetic cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Reduction of select or total C9orf72 transcript and protein levels is observed in postmortem C9-ALS/FTD tissue, and loss of C9orf72 orthologues in zebrafish and C. elegans results in motor deficits. However, how the reduction in C9orf72 in ALS and FTD might contribute to the disease process remains poorly understood. It has been shown that C9orf72 interacts and forms a complex with SMCR8 and WDR41, acting as a guanine exchange factor for Rab GTPases. Given the known synaptosomal compartmentalization of C9orf72-interacting Rab GTPases, we hypothesized that C9orf72 localization to synaptosomes would be required for the regulation of Rab GTPases and receptor trafficking. This study combined synaptosomal and post-synaptic density preparations together with a knockout-confirmed monoclonal antibody for C9orf72 to assess the localization and role of C9orf72 in the synaptosomes of mouse forebrains. Here, we found C9orf72 to be localized to both the pre- and post-synaptic compartment, as confirmed by both post-synaptic immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence labelling. In C9orf72 knockout (C9-KO) mice, we demonstrated that pre-synaptic Rab3a, Rab5, and Rab11 protein levels remained stable compared with wild-type littermates (C9-WT). Strikingly, post-synaptic preparations from C9-KO mouse forebrains demonstrated a complete loss of Smcr8 protein levels, together with a significant downregulation of Rab39b and a concomitant upregulation of GluR1 compared with C9-WT mice. We confirmed the localization of Rab39b downregulation and GluR1 upregulation to the dorsal hippocampus of C9-KO mice by immunofluorescence. These results indicate that C9orf72 is essential for the regulation of post-synaptic receptor levels, and implicates loss of C9orf72 in contributing to synaptic dysfunction and related excitotoxicity in ALS and FTD.Ambra1 is considered an autophagy and trafficking protein with roles in neurogenesis and cancer cell invasion. Here, we report that Ambra1 also localizes to the nucleus of cancer cells, where it has a novel nuclear scaffolding function that controls gene expression. Using biochemical fractionation and proteomics, we found that Ambra1 binds to multiple classes of proteins in the nucleus, including nuclear pore proteins, adaptor proteins such as FAK and Akap8, chromatin-modifying proteins, and transcriptional regulators like Brg1 and Atf2. We identified biologically important genes, such as Angpt1, Tgfb2, Tgfb3, Itga8, and Itgb7, whose transcription is regulated by Ambra1-scaffolded complexes, likely by altering histone modifications and Atf2 activity. Therefore, in addition to its recognized roles in autophagy and trafficking, Ambra1 scaffolds protein complexes at chromatin, regulating transcriptional signaling in the nucleus. This novel function for Ambra1, and the specific genes impacted, may help to explain the wider role of Ambra1 in cancer cell biology.Approximately 2-15% of couples experience infertility, and around half of these cases are attributed to male infertility. We previously identified TBC1D21 as a sterility-related RabGAP gene derived from infertile men. However, the in vivo function of TBC1D21 in male fertility remains unclear. Here, we show that loss of Tbc1d21 in mice resulted in male infertility, characterized by defects in sperm tail structure and diminished sperm motility. The mitochondria of the sperm-tail had an abnormal irregular arrangement, abnormal diameter, and structural defects. Moreover, the axoneme structure of sperm tails was severely disturbed. Several TBC1D21 interactors were selected via proteomic analysis and functional grouping. Two of the candidate interactors, a subunit protein of translocase in the outer membrane of mitochondria (TOMM20) and an inner arm component of the sperm tail axoneme (Dynein Heavy chain 7, DNAH7), confirmed in vivo physical co-localization with TBC1D21. In addition, TOMM20 and DNAH7 detached and dispersed outside the axoneme in Tbc1d21-deficient sperm, instead of aligning with the axoneme. From a clinical perspective, the transcript levels of TBC1D21 in sperm from teratozoospermia cases were significantly reduced when compared with those in normozoospermia. We concluded that TBC1D21 is critical for mitochondrial and axoneme development of mammalian sperm.Mammalian development, adult tissue homeostasis and the avoidance of severe diseases including cancer require a properly orchestrated cell cycle, as well as error-free genome maintenance. The key cell-fate decision to replicate the genome is controlled by two major signalling pathways that act in parallel-the MYC pathway and the cyclin D-cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)-retinoblastoma protein (RB) pathway1,2. Both MYC and the cyclin D-CDK-RB axis are commonly deregulated in cancer, and this is associated with increased genomic instability. The autophagic tumour-suppressor protein AMBRA1 has been linked to the control of cell proliferation, but the underlying molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here we show that AMBRA1 is an upstream master regulator of the transition from G1 to S phase and thereby prevents replication stress. Using a combination of cell and molecular approaches and in vivo models, we reveal that AMBRA1 regulates the abundance of D-type cyclins by mediating their degradation. Furthermore, by controlling the transition from G1 to S phase, AMBRA1 helps to maintain genomic integrity during DNA replication, which counteracts developmental abnormalities and tumour growth. Finally, we identify the CHK1 kinase as a potential therapeutic target in AMBRA1-deficient tumours. These results advance our understanding of the control of replication-phase entry and genomic integrity, and identify the AMBRA1-cyclin D pathway as a crucial cell-cycle-regulatory mechanism that is deeply interconnected with genomic stability in embryonic development and tumorigenesis.D-type cyclins are central regulators of the cell division cycle and are among the most frequently deregulated therapeutic targets in human cancer1, but the mechanisms that regulate their turnover are still being debated2,3. Here, by combining biochemical and genetics studies in somatic cells, we identify CRL4AMBRA1 (also known as CRL4DCAF3) as the ubiquitin ligase that targets all three D-type cyclins for degradation. During development, loss of Ambra1 induces the accumulation of D-type cyclins and retinoblastoma (RB) hyperphosphorylation and hyperproliferation, and results in defects of the nervous system that are reduced by treating pregnant mice with the FDA-approved CDK4 and CDK6 (CDK4/6) inhibitor abemaciclib. Moreover, AMBRA1 acts as a tumour suppressor in mouse models and low AMBRA1 mRNA levels are predictive of poor survival in cancer patients. Cancer hotspot mutations in D-type cyclins abrogate their binding to AMBRA1 and induce their stabilization. Finally, a whole-genome, CRISPR-Cas9 screen identified AMBRA1 as a regulator of the response to CDK4/6 inhibition. Loss of AMBRA1 reduces sensitivity to CDK4/6 inhibitors by promoting the formation of complexes of D-type cyclins with CDK2. Collectively, our results reveal the molecular mechanism that controls the stability of D-type cyclins during cell-cycle progression, in development and in human cancer, and implicate AMBRA1 as a critical regulator of the RB pathway.The initiation of cell division integrates a large number of intra- and extracellular inputs. D-type cyclins (hereafter, cyclin D) couple these inputs to the initiation of DNA replication1. Increased levels of cyclin D promote cell division by activating cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (hereafter, CDK4/6), which in turn phosphorylate and inactivate the retinoblastoma tumour suppressor. Accordingly, increased levels and activity of cyclin D-CDK4/6 complexes are strongly linked to unchecked cell proliferation and cancer2,3. However, the mechanisms that regulate levels of cyclin D are incompletely understood4,5. Here we show that autophagy and beclin 1 regulator 1 (AMBRA1) is the main regulator of the degradation of cyclin D. We identified AMBRA1 in a genome-wide screen to investigate the genetic basis of  the response to CDK4/6 inhibition. Loss of AMBRA1 results in high levels of cyclin D in cells and in mice, which promotes proliferation and decreases sensitivity to CDK4/6 inhibition. Mechanistically, AMBRA1 mediates ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation of cyclin D as a substrate receptor for the cullin 4 E3 ligase complex. Loss of AMBRA1 enhances the growth of lung adenocarcinoma in a mouse model, and low levels of AMBRA1 correlate with worse survival in patients with lung adenocarcinoma. Thus, AMBRA1 regulates cellular levels of cyclin D, and contributes to cancer development and the response of cancer cells to CDK4/6 inhibitors.
